The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sejanus: His Fall, by Ben Jonson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Sejanus: His Fall

Author: Ben Jonson

Release Date: March, 2004 [EBook #5232]
Posting Date: June 4, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEJANUS: HIS FALL ***




Produced by Amy E Zelmer, Sue Asscher, and Robert Prince





SEJANUS: HIS FALL

By Ben Jonson



Transcriber's note: This play is based on events that happened a
millennium and a half before Jonson wrote it. Jonson added 247
scholarly footnotes to this play; all were in Latin (except
for a scattering of Greek). They, and the Greek quotation which
forms Tiberius Caesar's tag line in Scene II, Act II, have been
elided.





INTRODUCTION

THE greatest of English dramatists except Shakespeare, the first
literary dictator and poet-laureate, a writer of verse, prose,
satire, and criticism who most potently of all the men of his time
affected the subsequent course of English letters:  such was Ben
Jonson, and as such his strong personality assumes an interest to
us almost unparalleled, at least in his age.

Ben Jonson came of the stock that was centuries after to give to
the world Thomas Carlyle; for Jonson's grandfather was of
Annandale, over the Solway, whence he migrated to England.
Jonson's father lost his estate under Queen Mary, "having been cast
into prison and forfeited."  He entered the church, but died a
month before his illustrious son was born, leaving his widow and
child in poverty.  Jonson's birthplace was Westminster, and the
time of his birth early in 1573.  He was thus nearly ten years
Shakespeare's junior, and less well off, if a trifle better born.
But Jonson did not profit even by this slight advantage.  His
mother married beneath her, a wright or bricklayer, and Jonson was
for a time apprenticed to the trade.  As a youth he attracted the
attention of the famous antiquary, William Camden, then usher at
Westminster School, and there the poet laid the solid foundations
of his classical learning.  Jonson always held Camden in
veneration, acknowledging that to him he owed,

    "All that I am in arts, all that I know:"

and dedicating his first dramatic success, "Every Man in His
Humour," to him.  It is doubtful whether Jonson ever went to either
university, though Fuller says that he was "statutably admitted
into St. John's College, Cambridge."  He tells us that he took no
degree, but was later "Master of Arts in both the universities, by
their favour, not his study."  When a mere youth Jonson enlisted as
a soldier trailing his pike in Flanders in the protracted wars of
William the Silent against the Spanish.  Jonson was a large and
raw-boned lad; he became by his own account in time exceedingly
bulky.  In chat with his friend William Drummond of Hawthornden,
Jonson told how "in his service in the Low Countries he had, in the
face of both the camps, killed an enemy, and taken 'opima spolia'
from him;" and how "since his coming to England, being appealed to
the fields, he had killed his adversary which had hurt him in the
arm and whose sword was ten inches longer than his."  Jonson's
reach may have made up for the lack of his sword; certainly his
prowess lost nothing in the telling.  Obviously Jonson was brave,
combative, and not averse to talking of himself and his doings.

In 1592, Jonson returned from abroad penniless.  Soon after he
married, almost as early and quite as imprudently as Shakespeare.
He told Drummond curtly that "his wife was a shrew, yet honest";
for some years he lived apart from her in the household of Lord
Albany.  Yet two touching epitaphs among Jonson's 'Epigrams', "On
my first daughter," and "On my first son," attest the warmth of the
poet's family affections.  The daughter died in infancy, the son of
the plague; another son grew up to manhood little credit to his
father whom he survived.  We know nothing beyond this of Jonson's
domestic life.

How soon Jonson drifted into what we now call grandly "the
theatrical profession" we do not know.  In 1593 Marlowe made his
tragic exit from life, and Greene, Shakespeare's other rival on the
popular stage, had preceded Marlowe in an equally miserable death
the year before. Shakespeare already had the running to himself.
Jonson appears first in the employment of Philip Henslowe, the
exploiter of several troupes of players, manager, and father-in-law
of the famous actor, Edward Alleyn. From entries in 'Henslowe's
Diary', a species of theatrical account book which has been handed
down to us, we know that Jonson was connected with the Admiral's
men; for he borrowed £4 of Henslowe, July 28, 1597, paying back 3s.
9d. on the same day on account of his "share" (in what is not
altogether clear); while later, on December 3, of the same year,
Henslowe advanced 20s. to him "upon a book which he showed the plot
unto the company which he promised to deliver unto the company at
Christmas next."  In the next August Jonson was in collaboration
with Chettle and Porter in a play called "Hot Anger Soon Cold."
All this points to an association with Henslowe of some duration,
as no mere tyro would be thus paid in advance upon mere promise.
From allusions in Dekker's play, "Satiromastix," it appears that
Jonson, like Shakespeare, began life as an actor, and that he
"ambled in a leather pitch by a play-wagon" taking at one time the
part of Hieronimo in Kyd's famous play, "The Spanish Tragedy."  By
the beginning of 1598, Jonson, though still in needy circumstances,
had begun to receive recognition.  Francis Meres--well known for
his "Comparative Discourse of our English Poets with the Greek,
Latin, and Italian Poets," printed in 1598, and for his mention
therein of a dozen plays of Shakespeare by title--accords to Ben
Jonson a place as one of "our best in tragedy," a matter of some
surprise, as no known tragedy of Jonson from so early a date has
come down to us.  That Jonson was at work on tragedy, however, is
proved by the entries in Henslowe of at least three tragedies, now
lost, in which he had a hand.  These are "Page of Plymouth," "King
Robert II. of Scotland," and "Richard Crookback."  But all of these
came later, on his return to Henslowe, and range from August 1599
to June 1602.

Returning to the autumn of 1598, an event now happened to sever for
a time Jonson's relations with Henslowe.  In a letter to Alleyn,
dated September 26 of that year, Henslowe writes:  "I have lost one
of my company that hurteth me greatly; that is Gabriel [Spencer],
for he is slain in Hogsden fields by the hands of Benjamin Jonson,
bricklayer."  The last word is perhaps Henslowe's thrust at Jonson
in his displeasure rather than a designation of his actual
continuance at his trade up to this time.  It is fair to Jonson to
remark however, that his adversary appears to have been a notorious
fire-eater who had shortly before killed one Feeke in a similar
squabble.  Duelling was a frequent occurrence of the time among
gentlemen and the nobility; it was an imprudent breach of the peace
on the part of a player.  This duel is the one which Jonson
described years after to Drummond, and for it Jonson was duly
arraigned at Old Bailey, tried, and convicted.  He was sent to
prison and such goods and chattels as he had "were forfeited."  It
is a thought to give one pause that, but for the ancient law
permitting convicted felons to plead, as it was called, the benefit
of clergy, Jonson might have been hanged for this deed.  The
circumstance that the poet could read and write saved him; and he
received only a brand of the letter "T," for Tyburn, on his left
thumb.  While in jail Jonson became a Roman Catholic; but he
returned to the faith of the Church of England a dozen years later.

On his release, in disgrace with Henslowe and his former
associates, Jonson offered his services as a playwright to
Henslowe's rivals, the Lord Chamberlain's company, in which
Shakespeare was a prominent shareholder.  A tradition of long
standing, though not susceptible of proof in a court of law,
narrates that Jonson had submitted the manuscript of "Every Man in
His Humour" to the Chamberlain's men and had received from the
company a refusal; that Shakespeare called him back, read the play
himself, and at once accepted it.  Whether this story is true or
not, certain it is that "Every Man in His Humour" was accepted by
Shakespeare's company and acted for the first time in 1598, with
Shakespeare taking a part.  The evidence of this is contained in
the list of actors prefixed to the comedy in the folio of Jonson's
works, 1616.  But it is a mistake to infer, because Shakespeare's
name stands first in the list of actors and the elder Kno'well
first in the 'dramatis personae', that Shakespeare took that
particular part.  The order of a list of Elizabethan players was
generally that of their importance or priority as shareholders in
the company and seldom if ever corresponded to the list of
characters.

"Every Man in His Humour" was an immediate success, and with it
Jonson's reputation as one of the leading dramatists of his time
was established once and for all.  This could have been by no means
Jonson's earliest comedy, and we have just learned that he was
already reputed one of "our best in tragedy."  Indeed, one of
Jonson's extant comedies, "The Case is Altered," but one never
claimed by him or published as his, must certainly have preceded
"Every Man in His Humour" on the stage.  The former play may be
described as a comedy modelled on the Latin plays of Plautus.  (It
combines, in fact, situations derived from the "Captivi" and the
"Aulularia" of that dramatist).  But the pretty story of the
beggar-maiden, Rachel, and her suitors, Jonson found, not among the
classics, but in the ideals of romantic love which Shakespeare had
already popularised on the stage.  Jonson never again produced so
fresh and lovable a feminine personage as Rachel, although in other
respects "The Case is Altered" is not a conspicuous play, and, save
for the satirising of Antony Munday in the person of Antonio
Balladino and Gabriel Harvey as well, is perhaps the least
characteristic of the comedies of Jonson.

"Every Man in His Humour," probably first acted late in the summer
of 1598 and at the Curtain, is commonly regarded as an epoch-making
play; and this view is not unjustified.  As to plot, it tells
little more than how an intercepted letter enabled a father to
follow his supposedly studious son to London, and there observe his
life with the gallants of the time.  The real quality of this
comedy is in its personages and in the theory upon which they are
conceived.  Ben Jonson had theories about poetry and the drama, and
he was neither chary in talking of them nor in experimenting with
them in his plays.  This makes Jonson, like Dryden in his time, and
Wordsworth much later, an author to reckon with; particularly when
we remember that many of Jonson's notions came for a time
definitely to prevail and to modify the whole trend of English
poetry.  First of all Jonson was a classicist, that is, he believed
in restraint and precedent in art in opposition to the prevalent
ungoverned and irresponsible Renaissance spirit.  Jonson believed
that there was a professional way of doing things which might be
reached by a study of the best examples, and he found these
examples for the most part among the ancients.  To confine our
attention to the drama, Jonson objected to the amateurishness and
haphazard nature of many contemporary plays, and set himself to do
something different; and the first and most striking thing that he
evolved was his conception and practice of the comedy of humours.

As Jonson has been much misrepresented in this matter, let us quote
his own words as to "humour."  A humour, according to Jonson, was a
bias of disposition, a warp, so to speak, in character by which

    "Some one peculiar quality
    Doth so possess a man, that it doth draw
    All his affects, his spirits, and his powers,
    In their confluctions, all to run one way."

But continuing, Jonson is careful to add:

    "But that a rook by wearing a pied feather,
    The cable hat-band, or the three-piled ruff,
    A yard of shoe-tie, or the Switzers knot
    On his French garters, should affect a humour!
    O, it is more than most ridiculous."


Jonson's comedy of humours, in a word, conceived of stage
personages on the basis of a ruling trait or passion (a notable
simplification of actual life be it observed in passing); and,
placing these typified traits in juxtaposition in their conflict
and contrast, struck the spark of comedy. Downright, as his name
indicates, is "a plain squire"; Bobadill's humour is that of the
braggart who is incidentally, and with delightfully comic effect, a
coward; Brainworm's humour is the finding out of things to the end
of fooling everybody:  of course he is fooled in the end himself.
But it was not Jonson's theories alone that made the success of
"Every Man in His Humour."  The play is admirably written and each
character is vividly conceived, and with a firm touch based on
observation of the men of the London of the day.  Jonson was
neither in this, his first great comedy (nor in any other play that
he wrote), a supine classicist, urging that English drama return to
a slavish adherence to classical conditions.  He says as to the
laws of the old comedy (meaning by "laws," such matters as the
unities of time and place and the use of chorus):  "I see not then,
but we should enjoy the same licence, or free power to illustrate
and heighten our invention as they [the ancients] did; and not be
tied to those strict and regular forms which the niceness of a few,
who are nothing but form, would thrust upon us."  "Every Man in His
Humour" is written in prose, a novel practice which Jonson had of
his predecessor in comedy, John Lyly.  Even the word "humour" seems
to have been employed in the Jonsonian sense by Chapman before
Jonson's use of it.  Indeed, the comedy of humours itself is only a
heightened variety of the comedy of manners which represents life,
viewed at a satirical angle, and is the oldest and most persistent
species of comedy in the language.  None the less, Jonson's comedy
merited its immediate success and marked out a definite course in
which comedy long continued to run.  To mention only Shakespeare's
Falstaff and his rout, Bardolph, Pistol, Dame Quickly, and the
rest, whether in "Henry IV." or in "The Merry Wives of Windsor,"
all are conceived in the spirit of humours. So are the captains,
Welsh, Scotch, and Irish of "Henry V.," and Malvolio especially
later; though Shakespeare never employed the method of humours for
an important personage.  It was not Jonson's fault that many of his
successors did precisely the thing that he had reprobated, that is,
degrade "the humour: into an oddity of speech, an eccentricity of
manner, of dress, or cut of beard."  There was an anonymous play
called "Every Woman in Her Humour."  Chapman wrote "A Humourous
Day's Mirth," Day, "Humour Out of Breath," Fletcher later, "The
Humourous Lieutenant," and Jonson, besides "Every Man Out of His
Humour," returned to the title in closing the cycle of his comedies
in "The Magnetic Lady or Humours Reconciled."

With the performance of "Every Man Out of His Humour" in 1599, by
Shakespeare's company once more at the Globe, we turn a new page in
Jonson's career.  Despite his many real virtues, if there is one
feature more than any other that distinguishes Jonson, it is his
arrogance; and to this may be added his self-righteousness,
especially under criticism or satire.  "Every Man Out of His
Humour" is the first of three "comical satires" which Jonson
contributed to what Dekker called the 'poetomachia' or war of the
theatres as recent critics have named it.  This play as a fabric of
plot is a very slight affair; but as a satirical picture of the
manners of the time, proceeding by means of vivid caricature,
couched in witty and brilliant dialogue and sustained by that
righteous indignation which must lie at the heart of all true
satire--as a realisation, in short, of the classical ideal of
comedy--there had been nothing like Jonson's comedy since the days
of Aristophanes.  "Every Man in His Humour," like the two plays
that follow it, contains two kinds of attack, the critical or
generally satiric, levelled at abuses and corruptions in the
abstract; and the personal, in which specific application is made
of all this in the lampooning of poets and others, Jonson's
contemporaries.  The method of personal attack by actual caricature
of a person on the stage is almost as old as the drama.
Aristophanes so lampooned Euripides in "The Acharnians" and
Socrates in "The Clouds," to mention no other examples; and in
English drama this kind of thing is alluded to again and again.
What Jonson really did, was to raise the dramatic lampoon to an
art, and make out of a casual burlesque and bit of mimicry a
dramatic satire of literary pretensions and permanency.  With the
arrogant attitude mentioned above and his uncommon eloquence in
scorn, vituperation, and invective, it is no wonder that Jonson
soon involved himself in literary and even personal quarrels with
his fellow-authors.  The circumstances of the origin of this
'poetomachia' are far from clear, and those who have written on the
topic, except of late, have not helped to make them clearer.  The
origin of the "war" has been referred to satirical references,
apparently to Jonson, contained in "The Scourge of Villainy," a
satire in regular form after the manner of the ancients by John
Marston, a fellow playwright, subsequent friend and collaborator of
Jonson's.  On the other hand, epigrams of Jonson have been
discovered (49, 68, and 100) variously charging "playwright"
(reasonably identified with Marston) with scurrility, cowardice,
and plagiarism; though the dates of the epigrams cannot be
ascertained with certainty.  Jonson's own statement of the matter
to Drummond runs:  "He had many quarrels with Marston, beat him,
and took his pistol from him, wrote his 'Poetaster' on him; the
beginning[s] of them were that Marston represented him on the
stage."*

     [footnote] *The best account of this whole subject is to be
     found in the edition of 'Poetaster' and 'Satiromastrix' by
     J. H. Penniman in 'Belles Lettres Series' shortly to appear.
     See also his earlier work, 'The War of the Theatres', 1892,
     and the excellent contributions to the subject by H. C. Hart
     in 'Notes and Queries', and in his edition of Jonson, 1906.

Here at least we are on certain ground; and the principals of the
quarrel are known.  "Histriomastix," a play revised by Marston in
1598, has been regarded as the one in which Jonson was thus
"represented on the stage"; although the personage in question,
Chrisogonus, a poet, satirist, and translator, poor but proud, and
contemptuous of the common herd, seems rather a complimentary
portrait of Jonson than a caricature.  As to the personages
actually ridiculed in "Every Man Out of His Humour," Carlo Buffone
was formerly thought certainly to be Marston, as he was described
as "a public scurrilous, and profane jester," and elsewhere as the
grand scourge or second untruss [that is, satirist], of the time
(Joseph Hall being by his own boast the first, and Marston's work
being entitled "The Scourge of Villainy").  Apparently we must now
prefer for Carlo a notorious character named Charles Chester, of
whom gossipy and inaccurate Aubrey relates that he was "a bold
impertinent fellow...a perpetual talker and made a noise like a
drum in a room.  So one time at a tavern Sir Walter Raleigh beats
him and seals up his mouth (that is his upper and nether beard)
with hard wax.  From him Ben Jonson takes his Carlo Buffone
['i.e.', jester] in 'Every Man in His Humour' ['sic']."  Is it
conceivable that after all Jonson was ridiculing Marston, and that
the point of the satire consisted in an intentional confusion of
"the grand scourge or second untruss" with "the scurrilous and
profane" Chester?

We have digressed into detail in this particular case to exemplify
the difficulties of criticism in its attempts to identify the
allusions in these forgotten quarrels.  We are on sounder ground of
fact in recording other manifestations of Jonson's enmity.  In "The
Case is Altered" there is clear ridicule in the character Antonio
Balladino of Anthony Munday, pageant-poet of the city, translator
of romances and playwright as well. In "Every Man in His Humour"
there is certainly a caricature of Samuel Daniel, accepted poet of
the court, sonneteer, and companion of men of fashion.  These men
held recognised positions to which Jonson felt his talents better
entitled him; they were hence to him his natural enemies. It seems
almost certain that he pursued both in the personages of his satire
through "Every Man Out of His Humour," and "Cynthia's Revels,"
Daniel under the characters Fastidious Brisk and Hedon, Munday as
Puntarvolo and Amorphus; but in these last we venture on quagmire
once more.  Jonson's literary rivalry of Daniel is traceable again
and again, in the entertainments that welcomed King James on his
way to London, in the masques at court, and in the pastoral drama.
As to Jonson's personal ambitions with respect to these two men, it
is notable that he became, not pageant-poet, but chronologer to the
City of London; and that, on the accession of the new king, he came
soon to triumph over Daniel as the accepted entertainer of royalty.

"Cynthia's Revels," the second "comical satire," was acted in 1600,
and, as a play, is even more lengthy, elaborate, and impossible
than "Every Man Out of His Humour."  Here personal satire seems to
have absorbed everything, and while much of the caricature is
admirable, especially in the detail of witty and trenchantly
satirical dialogue, the central idea of a fountain of self-love is
not very well carried out, and the persons revert at times to
abstractions, the action to allegory.  It adds to our wonder that
this difficult drama should have been acted by the Children of
Queen Elizabeth's Chapel, among them Nathaniel Field with whom
Jonson read Horace and Martial, and whom he taught later how to
make plays.  Another of these precocious little actors was
Salathiel Pavy, who died before he was thirteen, already famed for
taking the parts of old men.  Him Jonson immortalised in one of the
sweetest of his epitaphs.  An interesting sidelight is this on the
character of this redoubtable and rugged satirist, that he should
thus have befriended and tenderly remembered these little
theatrical waifs, some of whom (as we know) had been literally
kidnapped to be pressed into the service of the theatre and whipped
to the conning of their difficult parts.  To the caricature of
Daniel and Munday in "Cynthia's Revels" must be added Anaides
(impudence), here assuredly Marston, and Asotus (the prodigal),
interpreted as Lodge or, more perilously, Raleigh.  Crites, like
Asper-Macilente in "Every Man Out of His Humour," is Jonson's
self-complaisant portrait of himself, the just, wholly admirable,
and judicious scholar, holding his head high above the pack of the
yelping curs of envy and detraction, but careless of their puny
attacks on his perfections with only too mindful a neglect.

The third and last of the "comical satires" is "Poetaster," acted,
once more, by the Children of the Chapel in 1601, and Jonson's only
avowed contribution to the fray.  According to the author's own
account, this play was written in fifteen weeks on a report that
his enemies had entrusted to Dekker the preparation of
"Satiromastix, the Untrussing of the Humorous Poet," a dramatic
attack upon himself.  In this attempt to forestall his enemies
Jonson succeeded, and "Poetaster" was an immediate and deserved
success.  While hardly more closely knit in structure than its
earlier companion pieces, "Poetaster" is planned to lead up to the
ludicrous final scene in which, after a device borrowed from the
"Lexiphanes" of Lucian, the offending poetaster, Marston-Crispinus,
is made to throw up the difficult words with which he had
overburdened his stomach as well as overlarded his vocabulary.  In
the end Crispinus with his fellow, Dekker-Demetrius, is bound over
to keep the peace and never thenceforward "malign, traduce, or
detract the person or writings of Quintus Horatius Flaccus [Jonson]
or any other eminent man transcending you in merit."  One of the
most diverting personages in Jonson's comedy is Captain Tucca.
"His peculiarity" has been well described by Ward as "a buoyant
blackguardism which recovers itself instantaneously from the most
complete exposure, and a picturesqueness of speech like that of a
walking dictionary of slang."

It was this character, Captain Tucca, that Dekker hit upon in his
reply, "Satiromastix," and he amplified him, turning his abusive
vocabulary back upon Jonson and adding "An immodesty to his
dialogue that did not enter into Jonson's conception."  It has been
held, altogether plausibly, that when Dekker was engaged
professionally, so to speak, to write a dramatic reply to Jonson,
he was at work on a species of chronicle history, dealing with the
story of Walter Terill in the reign of William Rufus.  This he
hurriedly adapted to include the satirical characters suggested by
"Poetaster," and fashioned to convey the satire of his reply.  The
absurdity of placing Horace in the court of a Norman king is the
result. But Dekker's play is not without its palpable hits at the
arrogance, the literary pride, and self-righteousness of
Jonson-Horace, whose "ningle" or pal, the absurd Asinius Bubo, has
recently been shown to figure forth, in all likelihood, Jonson's
friend, the poet Drayton.  Slight and hastily adapted as is
"Satiromastix," especially in a comparison with the better wrought
and more significant satire of "Poetaster," the town awarded the
palm to Dekker, not to Jonson; and Jonson gave over in consequence
his practice of "comical satire."  Though Jonson was cited to
appear before the Lord Chief Justice to answer certain charges to
the effect that he had attacked lawyers and soldiers in
"Poetaster," nothing came of this complaint.  It may be suspected
that much of this furious clatter and give-and-take was pure
playing to the gallery.  The town was agog with the strife, and on
no less an authority than Shakespeare ("Hamlet," ii. 2), we learn
that the children's company (acting the plays of Jonson) did "so
berattle the common stages...that many, wearing rapiers, are
afraid of goose-quills, and dare scarce come thither."

Several other plays have been thought to bear a greater or less
part in the war of the theatres.  Among them the most important is
a college play, entitled "The Return from Parnassus," dating
1601-02.  In it a much-quoted passage makes Burbage, as a
character, declare:  "Why here's our fellow Shakespeare puts them
all down; aye and Ben Jonson, too.  O that Ben Jonson is a
pestilent fellow; he brought up Horace, giving the poets a pill,
but our fellow Shakespeare hath given him a purge that made him
bewray his credit."  Was Shakespeare then concerned in this war of
the stages?  And what could have been the nature of this "purge"?
Among several suggestions, "Troilus and Cressida" has been thought
by some to be the play in which Shakespeare thus "put down" his
friend, Jonson.  A wiser interpretation finds the "purge" in
"Satiromastix," which, though not written by Shakespeare, was
staged by his company, and therefore with his approval and under
his direction as one of the leaders of that company.

The last years of the reign of Elizabeth thus saw Jonson recognised
as a dramatist second only to Shakespeare, and not second even to
him as a dramatic satirist.  But Jonson now turned his talents to
new fields.  Plays on subjects derived from classical story and
myth had held the stage from the beginning of the drama, so that
Shakespeare was making no new departure when he wrote his "Julius
Caesar" about 1600.  Therefore when Jonson staged "Sejanus," three
years later and with Shakespeare'scompany once more, he was only
following in the elder dramatist's footsteps.  But Jonson's idea of
a play on classical history, on the one hand, and Shakespeare's and
the elder popular dramatists, on the other, were very different.
Heywood some years before had put five straggling plays on the
stage in quick succession, all derived from stories in Ovid and
dramatised with little taste or discrimination.  Shakespeare had a
finer conception of form, but even he was contented to take all his
ancient history from North's translation of Plutarch and dramatise
his subject without further inquiry. Jonson was a scholar and a
classical antiquarian.  He reprobated this slipshod amateurishness,
and wrote his "Sejanus" like a scholar, reading Tacitus, Suetonius,
and other authorities, to be certain of his facts, his setting, and
his atmosphere, and somewhat pedantically noting his authorities in
the margin when he came to print.  "Sejanus" is a tragedy of
genuine dramatic power in which is told with discriminating taste
the story of the haughty favourite of Tiberius with his tragical
overthrow.  Our drama presents no truer nor more painstaking
representation of ancient Roman life than may be found in Jonson's
"Sejanus" and "Catiline his Conspiracy," which followed in 1611.  A
passage in the address of the former play to the reader, in which
Jonson refers to a collaboration in an earlier version, has led to
the surmise that Shakespeare may have been that "worthier pen."
There is no evidence to determine the matter.

In 1605, we find Jonson in active collaboration with Chapman and
Marston in the admirable comedy of London life entitled "Eastward
Hoe."  In the previous year, Marston had dedicated his
"Malcontent," in terms of fervid admiration, to Jonson; so that the
wounds of the war of the theatres must have been long since healed.
Between Jonson and Chapman there was the kinship of similar
scholarly ideals.  The two continued friends throughout life.
"Eastward Hoe" achieved the extraordinary popularity represented in
a demand for three issues in one year.  But this was not due
entirely to the merits of the play.  In its earliest version a
passage which an irritable courtier conceived to be derogatory to
his nation, the Scots, sent both Chapman and Jonson to jail; but
the matter was soon patched up, for by this time Jonson had
influence at court.

With the accession of King James, Jonson began his long and
successful career as a writer of masques.  He wrote more masques
than all his competitors together, and they are of an extraordinary
variety and poetic excellence.  Jonson did not invent the masque;
for such premeditated devices to set and frame, so to speak, a
court ball had been known and practised in varying degrees of
elaboration long before his time.  But Jonson gave dramatic value
to the masque, especially in his invention of the antimasque, a
comedy or farcical element of relief, entrusted to professional
players or dancers.  He enhanced, as well, the beauty and dignity
of those portions of the masque in which noble lords and ladies
took their parts to create, by their gorgeous costumes and artistic
grouping and evolutions, a sumptuous show.  On the mechanical and
scenic side Jonson had an inventive and ingenious partner in Inigo
Jones, the royal architect, who more than any one man raised the
standard of stage representation in the England of his day.  Jonson
continued active in the service of the court in the writing of
masques and other entertainments far into the reign of King
Charles; but, towards the end, a quarrel with Jones embittered his
life, and the two testy old men appear to have become not only a
constant irritation to each other, but intolerable bores at court.
In "Hymenaei," "The Masque of Queens," "Love Freed from Ignorance,"
"Lovers made Men," "Pleasure Reconciled to Virtue," and many more
will be found Jonson's aptitude, his taste, his poetry and
inventiveness in these by-forms of the drama; while in "The Masque
of Christmas," and "The Gipsies Metamorphosed" especially, is
discoverable that power ofbroad comedy which, at court as well as
in the city, was not the least element of Jonson's contemporary
popularity.

But Jonson had by no means given up the popular stage when he
turned to the amusement of King James.  In 1605 "Volpone" was
produced, "The Silent Woman" in 1609, "The Alchemist" in the
following year.  These comedies, with "Bartholomew Fair," 1614,
represent Jonson at his height, and for constructive cleverness,
character successfully conceived in the manner of caricature, wit
and brilliancy of dialogue, they stand alone in English drama.
"Volpone, or the Fox," is, in a sense, a transition play from the
dramatic satires of the war of the theatres to the purer comedy
represented in the plays named above.  Its subject is a struggle of
wit applied to chicanery; for among its 'dramatis personae', from
the villainous Fox himself, his rascally servant Mosca, Voltore
(the vulture), Corbaccio and Corvino (the big and the little
raven), to Sir Politic Would-be and the rest, there is scarcely a
virtuous character in the play.  Question has been raised as to
whether a story so forbidding can be considered a comedy, for,
although the plot ends in the discomfiture and imprisonment of the
most vicious, it involves no moral catastrophe.  But Jonson was on
sound historical ground, for "Volpone" is conceived far more
logically on the lines of the ancients' theory of comedy than was
ever the romantic drama of Shakespeare, however repulsive we may
find a philosophy of life that facilely divides the world into the
rogues and their dupes, and, identifying brains with roguery and
innocence with folly, admires the former while inconsistently
punishing them.

"The Silent Woman" is a gigantic farce of the most ingenious
construction. The whole comedy hinges on a huge joke, played by a
heartless nephew on his misanthropic uncle, who is induced to take
to himself a wife, young, fair, and warranted silent, but who, in
the end, turns out neither silent nor a woman at all.  In "The
Alchemist," again, we have the utmost cleverness in construction,
the whole fabric building climax on climax, witty, ingenious, and
so plausibly presented that we forget its departures from the
possibilities of life.  In "The Alchemist" Jonson represented, none
the less to the life, certain sharpers of the metropolis, revelling
in their shrewdness and rascality and in the variety of the
stupidity and wickedness of their victims.  We may object to the
fact that the only person in the play possessed of a scruple of
honesty is discomfited, and that the greatest scoundrel of all is
approved in the end and rewarded.  The comedy is so admirably
written and contrived, the personages stand out with such lifelike
distinctness in their several kinds, and the whole is animated with
such verve and resourcefulness that "The Alchemist" is a new marvel
every time it is read.  Lastly of this group comes the tremendous
comedy, "Bartholomew Fair," less clear cut, less definite, and less
structurally worthy of praise than its three predecessors, but full
of the keenest and cleverest of satire and inventive to a degree
beyond any English comedy save some other of Jonson's own.  It is
in "Bartholomew Fair" that we are presented to the immortal
caricature of the Puritan, Zeal-in-the-Land Busy, and the
Littlewits that group about him, and it is in this extraordinary
comedy that the humour of Jonson, always open to this danger,
loosens into the Rabelaisian mode that so delighted King James in
"The Gipsies Metamorphosed."  Another comedy of less merit is "The
Devil is an Ass," acted in 1616.  It was the failure of this play
that caused Jonson to give over writing for the public stage for a
period of nearly ten years.

"Volpone" was laid as to scene in Venice.  Whether because of the
success of "Eastward Hoe" or for other reasons, the other three
comedies declare in the words of the prologue to "The Alchemist":

"Our scene is London, 'cause we would make known
No country's mirth is better than our own."


Indeed Jonson went further when he came to revise his plays for
collected publication in his folio of 1616, he transferred the
scene of "Every Man in His Humou r" from Florence to London also,
converting Signior Lorenzo di Pazzi to Old Kno'well, Prospero to
Master Welborn, and Hesperida to Dame Kitely "dwelling i' the Old
Jewry."

In his comedies of London life, despite his trend towards
caricature, Jonson has shown himself a genuine realist, drawing
from the life about him with an experience and insight rare in any
generation.  A happy comparison has been suggested between Ben
Jonson and Charles Dickens.  Both were men of the people, lowly
born and hardly bred.  Each knew the London of his time as few men
knew it; and each represented it intimately and in elaborate
detail.  Both men were at heart moralists, seeking the truth by the
exaggerated methods of humour and caricature; perverse, even
wrong-headed at times, but possessed of a true pathos and largeness
of heart, and when all has been said--though the Elizabethan ran to
satire, the Victorian to sentimentality--leaving the world better
for the art that they practised in it.

In 1616, the year of the death of Shakespeare, Jonson collected his
plays, his poetry, and his masques for publication in a collective
edition.  This was an unusual thing at the time and had been
attempted by no dramatist before Jonson.  This volume published, in
a carefully revised text, all the plays thus far mentioned,
excepting "The Case is Altered," which Jonson did not acknowledge,
"Bartholomew Fair," and "The Devil is an Ass," which was written
too late.  It included likewise a book of some hundred and thirty
odd 'Epigrams', in which form of brief and pungent writing Jonson
was an acknowledged master; "The Forest," a smaller collection of
lyric and occasional verse and some ten 'Masques' and
'Entertainments'.  In this same year Jonson was made poet laureate
with a pension of one hundred marks a year.  This, with his fees
and returns from several noblemen, and the small earnings of his
plays must have formed the bulk of his income.  The poet appears to
have done certain literary hack-work for others, as, for example,
parts of the Punic Wars contributed to Raleigh's 'History of the
World'.  We know from a story, little to the credit of either, that
Jonson accompanied Raleigh's son abroad in the capacity of a tutor.
In 1618 Jonson was granted the reversion of the office of Master of
the Revels, a post for which he was peculiarly fitted; but he did
not live to enjoy its perquisites.  Jonson was honoured with
degrees by both universities, though when and under what
circumstances is not known.  It has been said that he narrowly
escaped the honour of knighthood, which the satirists of the day
averred King James was wont to lavish with an indiscriminate hand.
Worse men were made knights in his day than worthy Ben Jonson.

From 1616 to the close of the reign of King James, Jonson produced
nothing for the stage.  But he "prosecuted" what he calls "his
wonted studies" with such assiduity that he became in reality, as
by report, one of the most learned men of his time.  Jonson's
theory of authorship involved a wide acquaintance with books and
"an ability," as he put it, "to convert the substance or riches of
another poet to his own use."  Accordingly Jonson read not only the
Greek and Latin classics down to the lesser writers, but he
acquainted himself especially with the Latin writings of his
learned contemporaries, their prose as well as their poetry, their
antiquities and curious lore as well as their more solid learning.
Though a poor man, Jonson was an indefatigable collector of books.
He told Drummond that "the Earl of Pembroke sent him £20 every
first day of the new year to  buy new books."  Unhappily, in 1623,
his library was destroyed by fire, an accident serio-comically
described in his witty poem, "An Execration upon Vulcan." Yet even
now a book turns up from time to time in which is inscribed, in
fair large Italian lettering, the name, Ben Jonson.  With respect
to Jonson's use of his material, Dryden said memorably of him:
"[He] was not only a professed imitator of Horace, but a learned
plagiary of all the others; you track him everywhere in their snow.
...  But he has done his robberies so openly that one sees he
fears not to be taxed by any law.  He invades authors like a
monarch, and what would be theft in other poets is only victory in
him."  And yet it is but fair to say that Jonson prided himself,
and justly, on his originality.  In "Catiline," he not only uses
Sallust's account of the conspiracy, but he models some of the
speeches of Cicero on the Roman orator's actual words.  In
"Poetaster," he lifts a whole satire out of Horace and dramatises
it effectively for his purposes. The sophist Libanius suggests the
situation of "The Silent Woman"; a Latin comedy of Giordano Bruno,
"Il Candelaio," the relation of the dupes and the sharpers in "The
Alchemist," the "Mostellaria" of Plautus, its admirable opening
scene.  But Jonson commonly bettered his sources, and putting the
stamp of his sovereignty on whatever bullion he borrowed made it
thenceforward to all time current and his own.

The lyric and especially the occasional poetry of Jonson has a
peculiar merit.  His theory demanded design and the perfection of
literary finish. He was furthest from the rhapsodist and the
careless singer of an idle day; and he believed that Apollo could
only be worthily served in singing robes and laurel crowned.  And
yet many of Jonson's lyrics will live as long as the language.  Who
does not know "Queen and huntress, chaste and fair." "Drink to me
only with thine eyes," or "Still to be neat, still to be dressed"?
Beautiful in form, deft and graceful in expression, with not a word
too much or one that bears not its part in the total effect, there
is yet about the lyrics of Jonson a certain stiffness and
formality, a suspicion that they were not quite spontaneous and
unbidden, but that they were carved, so to speak, with
disproportionate labour by a potent man of letters whose habitual
thought is on greater things.  It is for these reasons that Jonson
is even better in the epigram and in occasional verse where
rhetorical finish and pointed wit less interfere with the
spontaneity and emotion which we usually associate with lyrical
poetry.  There are no such epitaphs as Ben Jonson's, witness the
charming ones on his own children, on Salathiel Pavy, the
child-actor, and many more; and this even though the rigid law of
mine and thine must now restore to William Browne of Tavistock the
famous lines beginning:  "Underneath this sable hearse." Jonson is
unsurpassed, too, in the difficult poetry of compliment, seldom
falling into fulsome praise and disproportionate similtude, yet
showing again and again a generous appreciation of worth in others,
a discriminating taste and a generous personal regard.  There was
no man in England of his rank so well known and universally beloved
as Ben Jonson. The list of his friends, of those to whom he had
written verses, and those who had written verses to him, includes
the name of every man of prominence in the England of King James.
And the tone of many of these productions discloses an affectionate
familiarity that speaks for the amiable personality and sound worth
of the laureate.  In 1619, growing unwieldy through inactivity,
Jonson hit upon the heroic remedy of a journey afoot to Scotland.
On his way thither and back he was hospitably received at the
houses of many friends and by those to whom his friends had
recommended him.  When he arrived in Edinburgh, the burgesses met
to grant him the freedom of the city, and Drummond, foremost of
Scottish poets, was proud to entertain him for weeks as his guest
at Hawthornden.  Some of the noblest of Jonson's poems were
inspired by friendship.  Such is the fine "Ode to the memory of Sir
Lucius Cary and Sir Henry Moryson," and that admirable piece of
critical insight and filial affection, prefixed to the first
Shakespeare folio, "To the memory of my beloved master, William
Shakespeare, and what he hath left us." to mention only these.  Nor
can the earlier "Epode," beginning "Not to know vice at all," be
matchedin stately gravity and gnomic wisdom in its own wise and
stately age.

But if Jonson had deserted the stage after the publication of his
folio and up to the end of the reign of King James, he was far from
inactive; for year after year his inexhaustible inventiveness
continued to contribute to the masquing and entertainment at court.
In "The Golden Age Restored," Pallas turns from the Iron Age with
its attendant evils into statues which sink out of sight; in
"Pleasure Reconciled to Virtue," Atlas figures represented as an
old man, his shoulders covered with snow, and Comus, "the god of
cheer or the belly," is one of the characters, a circumstance which
an imaginative boy of ten, named John Milton, was not to forget.
"Pan's Anniversary," late in the reign of James, proclaimed that
Jonson had not yet forgotten how to write exquisite lyrics, and
"The Gipsies Metamorphosed" displayed the old drollery and broad
humorous stroke still unimpaired and unmatchable.  These, too, and
the earlier years of Charles were the days of the Apollo Room of
the Devil Tavern where Jonson presided, the absolute monarch of
English literary Bohemia.  We hear of a room blazoned about with
Jonson's own judicious 'Leges Convivales' in letters of gold, of a
company made up of the choicest spirits of the time, devotedly
attached to their veteran dictator, his reminiscences, opinions,
affections, and enmities.  And we hear, too, of valorous potations;
but in the words of Herrick addressed to his master, Jonson, at the
Devil Tavern, as at the Dog, the Triple Tun, and at the Mermaid,

    "We such clusters had
     As made us nobly wild, not mad,
     And yet each verse of thine
     Outdid the meat, outdid the frolic wine."


But the patronage of the court failed in the days of King Charles,
though Jonson was not without royal favours; and the old poet
returned to the stage, producing, between 1625 and 1633, "The
Staple of News," "The New Inn," "The Magnetic Lady," and "The Tale
of a Tub," the last doubtless revised from a much earlier comedy.
None of these plays met with any marked success, although the
scathing generalisation of Dryden that designated them "Jonson's
dotages" is unfair to their genuine merits.  Thus the idea of an
office for the gathering, proper dressing, and promulgation of news
(wild flight of the fancy in its time) was an excellent subject for
satire on the existing absurdities among the newsmongers; although
as much can hardly be said for "The Magnetic Lady," who, in her
bounty, draws to her personages of differing humours to reconcile
them in the end according to the alternative title, or "Humours
Reconciled."  These last plays of the old dramatist revert to
caricature and the hard lines of allegory; the moralist is more
than ever present, the satire degenerates into personal lampoon,
especially of his sometime friend, Inigo Jones, who appears
unworthily to have used his influence at court against the
broken-down old poet.  And now disease claimed Jonson, and he was
bedridden for months.  He had succeeded Middleton in 1628 as
Chronologer to the City of London, but lost the post for not
fulfilling its duties.  King Charles befriended him, and even
commissioned him to write still for the entertainment of the court;
and he was not without the sustaining hand of noble patrons and
devoted friends among the younger poets who were proud to be
"sealed of the tribe of Ben."

Jonson died, August 6, 1637, and a second folio of his works, which
he had been some time gathering, was printed in 1640, bearing in
its various parts dates ranging from 1630 to 1642.  It included all
the plays mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs, excepting "The
Case is Altered;" the masques, some fifteen, that date between 1617
and 1630; another collection of lyrics and occasional poetry called
"Underwoods, including some further entertainments; a translation
of "Horace's Art of Poetry" (also published in a vicesimo quarto in
1640), and certain fragments and ingatherings which the poet would
hardly have included himself.  These last comprise the fragment
(less than seventy lines) of a tragedy called "Mortimer his Fall,"
and three acts of a pastoral drama of much beauty and poetic
spirit, "The Sad Shepherd."  There is also the exceedingly
interesting 'English Grammar' "made by Ben Jonson for the benefit
of all strangers out of his observation of the English language now
spoken and in use," in Latin and English; and 'Timber, or
discoveries' "made upon men and matter as they have flowed out of
his daily reading, or had their reflux to his peculiar notion of
the times."  The 'Discoveries', as it is usually called, is a
commonplace book such as many literary men have kept, in which
their reading was chronicled, passages that took their fancy
translated or transcribed, and their passing opinions noted.  Many
passage of Jonson's 'Discoveries' are literal translations from the
authors he chanced to be reading, with the reference, noted or not,
as the accident of the moment prescribed.  At times he follows the
line of Macchiavelli's argument as to the nature and conduct of
princes; at others he clarifies his own conception of poetry and
poets by recourse to Aristotle.  He finds a choice paragraph on
eloquence in Seneca the elder and applies it to his own
recollection of Bacon's power as an orator; and another on facile
and ready genius, and translates it, adapting it to his
recollection of his fellow-playwright, Shakespeare.  To call such
passages--which Jonson never intended for publication--plagiarism,
is to obscure the significance of words.  To disparage his memory
by citing them is a preposterous use of scholarship.  Jonson's
prose, both in his dramas, in the descriptive comments of his
masques, and in the 'Discoveries', is characterised by clarity and
vigorous directness, nor is it wanting in a fine sense of form or
in the subtler graces of diction.

When Jonson died there was a project for a handsome monument to his
memory. But the Civil War was at hand, and the project failed.  A
memorial, not insufficient, was carved on the stone covering his
grave in one of the aisles of Westminster Abbey:

     "O rare Ben Jonson."


FELIX E. SCHELLING.

THE COLLEGE, PHILADELPHIA, U.S.A.




COMPLETE LIST OF HIS PUBLISHED WORKS:--

DRAMAS. --

    Every Man in his Humour, 4to, 1601;
    The Case is Altered, 4to, 1609;
    Every Man out of his Humour, 4to, 1600;
    Cynthia's Revels, 4to, 1601;
    Poetaster, 4to, 1602;
    Sejanus, 4to, 1605;
    Eastward Ho (with Chapman and Marston), 4to, 1605;
    Volpone, 4to, 1607;
    Epicoene, or the Silent Woman, 4to, 1609 (?), fol., 1616;
    The Alchemist, 4to, 1612;
    Catiline, his Conspiracy, 4to, 1611;
    Bartholomew Fayre, 4to, 1614 (?), fol., 1631;
    The Divell is an Asse, fol., 1631;
    The Staple of Newes, fol., 1631;
    The New Sun, 8vo, 1631, fol., 1692;
    The Magnetic Lady, or Humours Reconcild, fol., 1640;
    A Tale of a Tub, fol., 1640;
    The Sad Shepherd, or a Tale of Robin Hood, fol., 1641;
    Mortimer his Fall (fragment), fol., 1640.


To Jonson have also been attributed additions to Kyd's Jeronymo,
and collaboration in The Widow with Fletcher and Middleton, and in
the Bloody Brother with Fletcher.

POEMS. --

    Epigrams, The Forrest, Underwoods, published in fols., 1616,
       1640;
    Selections:  Execration against Vulcan, and Epigrams, 1640;
    G. Hor. Flaccus his art of Poetry, Englished by Ben Jonson,
       1640;
    Leges Convivialis, fol., 1692.
    Other minor poems first appeared in Gifford's edition of Works.

PROSE. --

   Timber, or Discoveries made upon Men and Matter, fol., 1641;
   The English Grammar, made by Ben Jonson for the benefit of
      Strangers, fol., 1640.

Masques and Entertainments were published in the early folios.

WORKS. --

    Fol., 1616, vol. 2, 1640 (1631-41);
    fol., 1692, 1716-19, 1729;
       edited by P. Whalley, 7 vols., 1756;
       by Gifford (with Memoir), 9 vols., 1816, 1846;
       re-edited by F. Cunningham, 3 vols., 1871;
          in 9 vols., 1875;
    by Barry Cornwall (with Memoir), 1838;
    by B. Nicholson (Mermaid Series),
       with Introduction by C. H. Herford, 1893, etc.;
    Nine Plays, 1904; ed. H. C. Hart (Standard Library), 1906, etc;
    Plays and Poems, with Introduction by H. Morley (Universal
       Library), 1885;
    Plays (7) and Poems (Newnes), 1905;
    Poems, with Memoir by H. Bennett (Carlton Classics), 1907;
    Masques and Entertainments, ed. by H. Morley, 1890.

SELECTIONS. --

    J. A. Symonds, with Biographical and Critical Essay,
       (Canterbury Poets), 1886;
    Grosart, Brave Translunary Things, 1895;
    Arber, Jonson Anthology, 1901;
    Underwoods, Cambridge University Press, 1905;
    Lyrics (Jonson, Beaumont and Fletcher), the Chap Books,
       No. 4, 1906;
    Songs (from Plays, Masques, etc.), with earliest known setting,
       Eragny Press, 1906.


LIFE. --

   See Memoirs affixed to Works;
   J. A. Symonds (English Worthies), 1886;
   Notes of Ben Jonson Conversations with Drummond of Hawthornden;
       Shakespeare Society, 1842;
   ed. with Introduction and Notes by P. Sidney, 1906;
   Swinburne, A Study of Ben Jonson, 1889.




SEJANUS: HIS FALL

TO THE NO LESS NOBLE BY VIRTUE THAN BLOOD

ESME LORD AUBIGNY


My LORD,-If ever any ruin were so great as to survive, I think this
be one I send you, The Fall of Sejanus. It is a poem, that, if I
well remember, in your lordship's sight, suffered no less violence
from our people here, than the subject of it did from the rage of
the people of Rome; but with a different fate, as, I hope, merit:
for this hath outlived their malice, and begot itself a greater
favour than he lost, the love of good men. Amongst whom, if I make
your lordship the first it thanks, it is not without a just,
confession of the bond your benefits have, and ever shall hold upon
me,

                  Your lordship's most faithful honourer. BEN JONSON.




TO THE READERS


THE following and voluntary labours of my friends, prefixed to my
book, have relieved me in much whereat, without them, I should
necessarily have touched. Now I will only use three or four short
and needful notes, and so rest.

First, if it be objected, that what I publish is no true poem, in
the strict laws of time, I confess it: as also in the want of a
proper chorus; whose habit and moods are such and so difficult, as
not any, whom I have seen, since the ancients, no, not they who
have most presently affected laws, have yet come in the way of. Nor
is it needful, or almost possible in these our times, and to such
auditors as commonly things are presented, to observe the old state
and splendour of dramatic poems, with preservation of any popular
delight. But of this I shall take more seasonable cause to speak,
in my observations upon Horace his Art of Poetry, which, with the
text translated, I intend shortly to publish. In the mean time, if
in truth of argument, dignity of persons, gravity and height of
elocution, fulness and frequency of sentence, I have discharged the
other offices of a tragic writer, let not the absence of these
forms be imputed to me, wherein I shall give you occasion
hereafter, and without my boast, to think I could better prescribe,
than omit the due use for want of a convenient knowledge.

The next is, lest in some nice nostril the quotations might savour
affected, I do let you know, that I abhor nothing more; and I have
only done it to shew my integrity in the story, and save myself in
those common torturers that bring all wit to the rack; whose noses
are ever like swine, spoiling and rooting up the Muses' gardens;
and their whole bodies like moles, as blindly working under earth,
to cast any, the least, hills upon virtue. Whereas they are in
Latin, and the work in English, it was presupposed none but the
learned would take the pains to confer them: the authors themselves
being all in the learned tongues, save one, with whose English side
I have had little to do. To which it may be required, since I have
quoted the page, to name what editions I followed: Tacit. Lips. in
quarto, Antwerp, edit. 1600; Dio. folio, Hen. Steph. 1592. For the
rest, as Sueton, Seneca, etc., the chapter doth sufficiently
direct, or the edition is not varied.

Lastly, I would inform you, that this book, in all numbers, is not
the same with that which was acted on the public stage; wherein a
second: pen had good share: in place of which, I have rather chosen
to put weaker,  and no doubt, less pleasing, of mine own, than to
defraud so happy a genius of his right by my loathed usurpation.

Fare you well, and if you read farther of me, and like, I shall not
be afraid of it, though you praise me out.

                 Neque enim mihi cornea fibra est.


But that I should plant my felicity in your general saying, good,
or well, etc., were a weakness which the better sort of you might
worthily contemn, if not absolutely hate me for.

                                             BEN JONSON;
                                                  and no such,

                                                Quem
                Palma negata macrum, donata reducit opimum.




THE ARGUMENT


AELIUS SEJANUS, son to Seius Strabo, a gentleman of Rome, and born
at Vulsinium; after his long service in court, first under
Augustus; afterward, Tiberius; grew into that favour with the
latter, and won him by those arts, as there wanted nothing but the
name to make him a co-partner of the empire. Which greatness of
his, Drusus, the emperor's son, not brooking; after many smothered
dislikes, it one day breaking out, the prince struck him publicly
on the face. To revenge which disgrace, Livia, the wife of Drusus
(being before corrupted by him to her dishonour, and the discovery
of her husband's counsels) Sejanus practiseth with, together with
her physician called Eudemus, and one Lygdus an eunuch, to poison
Drusus. This their inhuman act having successful and unsuspected
passage, it emboldeneth Sejanus to further and more insolent
projects, even the ambition of the empire; where finding the lets
he must encounter to be many and hard, in respect of the issue of
Germanicus, who were next in hope for the succession, he deviseth
to make Tiberius' self his means, and instils into his ears many
doubts and suspicions, both against the princes, and their mother
Agrippina; which Caesar jealously hearkening to, as covetously
consenteth to their ruin, and their friends. In this time, the
better to mature and strengthen his design, Sejanus labours to
marry Livia, and worketh with all his ingine, to remove Tiberius
from the knowledge of public business, with allurements of a quiet
and retired life; the latter of which, Tiberius, out of a proneness
to lust, and a desire to  hide those unnatural pleasures which he
could not so publicly practise, embraceth: the former enkindleth
his fears, and there gives him first cause of doubt or suspect
towards Sejanus: against whom he raiseth in private a new
instrument, one Sertorius Macro, and by him underworketh, discovers
the other's counsels, his means, his ends, sounds the affections of
the senators, divides, distracts them: at last, when Sejanus least
looketh, and is most secure  with pretext of doing him an unwonted
honour in the senate, he trains him from his guards, and with a
long doubtful letter, one day hath him suspected, accused,
condemned, and torn in pieces by  the rage of the people.




DRAMATIS PERSONAE

       TIBERIUS.                   HATERIUS.
       DRUSUS SENIOR.              SANQUINIUS.
       NERO.                       POMPONIUS.
       DRUSUS JUNIOR.              JULIUS POSTHUMUS.
       CALIGULA.                   FULCINIUS TRIO.
       LUCIUS ARRUNTIUS.           MINUTIUS.
       CAIUS SILIUS.               SATRIUS SECUNDUS.
       TITIUS SABINUS.             PINNARIUS NATTA.
       MARCUS LEPIDUS.             OPSIUS.
       CREMUTIUS CORDUS.           Tribuni.
       ASINIUS GALLUS.             Praecones.
       REGULUS.                    Flamen.
       TERENTIUS.                  Tubicines.
       GRACINUS LACO.              Nuntius.
       EUDEMUS.                    Lictores.
       RUFUS.                      Minisri.
       SEJANUS.                    Tibicines.
       LATIARIS.                   Servi etc.
       VARRO.
       SERTORIUS MACRO.            AGRIPPINA.
       COTTA.                      LIVIA.
       DOMITIUS AFER.              SOSIA.



SCENE,-ROME





ACT I


            SCENE I.-A State Room in the Palace.


  Enter SABINUS and SILIUS, followed by LATIARIS.

  Sab. Hail, Caius  Silius!

  Sil. Titius Sabinus, hail! You're rarely met in court.

  Sab. Therefore, well met.

  Sil.'Tis true: indeed, this place is not our sphere.

  Sab.
     No, Silius, we are no good inginers.
     We want their fine arts, and their thriving use
     Should make us graced, or favour'd of the times:
     We have no shift of faces, no cleft tongues,
     No soft and glutinous bodies, that can stick,
     Like snails on painted walls; or, on our breasts,
     Creep up, to fall from that proud height, to which
     We did by slavery, not by service climb.
     We are no guilty men, and then no great;
     We have no place in court, office In state,
     That we can say, we owe unto our crimes:
     We burn with no black secrets, which can make
     Us dear to the pale authors; or live fear'd
     Of their still waking jealousies, to raise
     Ourselves a fortune, by subverting theirs.
     We stand not in the lines, that do advance
     To that so courted point.

                          Enter SATRIUS and NATTA, at a distance.

  Sil.
     But yonder lean
     A pair that do.

  Sab. [salutes Latiaris.] Good cousin Latiaris.----

  Sil.
     Satrius Secundus, and Pinnarius Natta,
     The great Sejanus' clients: there be two,
     Know more than honest counsels; whose close breasts,
     Were they ripp'd up to light, it would be found
     A poor and idle sin, to which their trunks
     Had not been made fit organs. These can lie,
     Flatter, and swear, forswear, deprave, inform,
     Smile, and betray; make guilty men; then beg
     The forfeit lives, to get their livings; cut
     Men's throats with whisperings; sell to gaping suitors
     The empty smoke, that flies about the palace;
     Laugh when their patron laughs; sweat when he sweats;
     Be hot and cold with him; change every mood,
     Habit, and garb, as often as he varies;
     Observe him, as his watch observes his clock;
     And, true, as turquoise in the dear lord's ring,
     Look well or ill with him: 6 ready to praise
     His lordship, if he spit, or but p---- fair,
     Have an indifferent stool, or break wind well;
     Nothing can 'scape their catch.

  Sab.
     Alas! these things
     Deserve no note, conferr'd with other vile
     And filthier flatteries, that corrupt the times;
     When, not alone our gentries chief are fain
     To make their safety from such sordid acts;
     But all our consuls, and no little part
     Of such as have been praetors, yea, the most
     Of senators, that else not use their voices,
     Start up in public senate and there strive
     Who shall propound most abject things, and base.
     So much, as oft Tuberous hath been heard,
     Leaving the court, to cry, O race of men;
     Prepared for servitude!----which shew'd that he.
     Who least the public liberty could like,
     As lothly brook'd their flat servility.

  Sil.
     Well, all is worthy of us, were it more,
     Who with our riots, pride, and civil hate,
     Have so provok'd the justice of the gods:
     We, that, within these fourscore years, were born
     Free, equal lords of the triumphed world,
     And knew no masters, but affections;
     To which betraying first our liberties,
     We since became the slaves to one man's lusts;
     And now to many: every minist'ring spy
     That will accuse and swear, is lord of you,
     Of me, of all our fortunes and our lives.
     Our looks are call'd to question, and our words,
     How innocent soever, are made crimes;
     We shall not shortly dare to tell our dreams,
     Or think, but 'twill be treason. Sab. Tyrants' arts
     Are to give flatterers grace; accusers, power;
     That those may seem to kill whom they devour.

                           Enter CORDUS and ARRUNTIUS.

     Now, good Cremutius Cordus

  Cor. [salutes Sabinus] Hail to your lordship!

  Nat. [whispers Latiaris.] Who's that salutes your cousin?

  Lat.
     'Tis one Cordus,
     A gentleman of Rome: one that has writ
     Annals of late, they say, and very well.

  Nat. Annals! of what times?

  Lat.
     I think of Pompey's,
     And Caius Caesar's; and so down to these.

  Nat.
     How stands he affected to the present state!
     Is he or Drusian, or Germanic,
     Or ours, or neutral?

  Lat. I know him not so far.

  Nat.
     Those times are somewhat queasy to be touch'd.
     Have you or seen, or heard part of his work?

  Lat. Not I; he means they shall be public shortly.

  Nat. O, Cordus do you call him?

  Lat. Ay.                    [Exeunt Natta and Satrius

  Sab.
     But these our times
     Are not the same, Arruntius.

  Arr.
     Times! the men,
     The men are not the same: 'tis we are base,
     Poor, and degenerate from the exalted strain
     Of our great fathers. Where is now the soul
     Of god-like Cato? he, that durst be good,
     When Caesar durst be evil; and had power,
     As not to live his slave, to die his master?
     Or where's the constant Brutus, that being proof
     Against all charm of benefits, did strike
     So brave a blow into the monster's heart
     That sought unkindly to captive his country?
     O, they are fled the light! Those mighty spirits
     Lie raked up with their ashes in their urns,
     And not a spark of their eternal fire
     Glows in a present bosom. All's but blaze,
     Flashes and smoke, wherewith we labour so,
     There's nothing Roman in us; nothing good,
     Gallant, or great: 'tis true that Cordus says,
     "Brave Cassius was the last of all that race."

             Drusus passes over the stage, attended by HATERIUS, etc.

  Sab. Stand by! lord Drusus.

  Hat. The emperor's son! give place.

  Sil. I like the prince well.

  Arr.
     A riotous youth;
     There's little hope of him.

  Sab.
     That fault his age
     Will, as it grows, correct. Methinks he bears
     Himself each day more nobly than other;
     And wins no less on men's affections,
     Than doth his father lose. Believe me,
     I love him; And chiefly for opposing to Sejanus.

  Sil.
     And I, for gracing his young kinsmen so,
     The sons  of prince Germanicus: it shews
     A gallant clearness in him, a straight mind,
     That envies not, in them, their father's name.

  Arr.
     His name was, while he lived, above all envy;
     And, being dead, without it. O, that man!
     If there were seeds of the old virtue left,
     They lived in him.

  Sil.
     He had the fruits, Arruntius,
     More than the seeds: Sabinus, and myself
     Had means to know him within; and can report him.
     We were his followers, he would call us friends;
     He was a man most like to virtue; in all,
     And every action, nearer to the gods,
     Than men, in nature; of a body as fair
     As was his mind; and no less reverend
     In face, than fame: he could so use his state,
     Tempering his greatness with his gravity,
     As it avoided all self-love in him,
     And spite in others. What his funerals lack'd
     In images and pomp, they had supplied
     With honourable sorrow, soldiers' sadness,
     A kind of silent mourning, such, as men,
     Who know no tears, but from their captives, use
     To shew in so great losses.

  Cor.
     I thought once,
     Considering their forms, age, manner of deaths,
     The nearness of the places where they fell,
     To have parallel'd him with great Alexander:
     For both were of best feature, of high race,
     Year'd but to thirty, and, in foreign lands,
     By their own people alike made away.
     Sab, I know not, for his death, how you might wrest it:
     But, for his life, it did as much disdain
     Comparison, with that voluptuous, rash,
     Giddy, and drunken Macedon's, as mine
     Doth with my bondman's. All the good in him,
     His valour and his fortune, he made his;
     But he had other touches of late Romans,
     That more did speak him: Pompey's dignity,
     The innocence of Cato, Caesar's spirit,
     Wise Brutus' temperance; and every virtue,
     Which, parted unto others, gave them name,
     Flow'd mix'd in him. He was the soul of goodness;
     And all our praises of him are like streams
     Drawn from a spring, that still rise full, and leave
     The part remaining greatest.

  Arr.
     I am sure
     He was too great for us, and that they knew
     Who did remove him hence.

  Sab.
     When men grow fast
     Honour'd and loved. there is a trick in state,
     Which jealous princes never fail to use,
     How to decline that growth, with fair pretext,
     And honourable colours of employment,
     Either by embassy, the war, or such,
     To shift them forth into another air,
     Where they may purge and lessen; so was he:
     And had his seconds there, sent by Tiberius,
     And his more subtile dam, to discontent him;
     To breed and cherish mutinies; detract
     His greatest actions; give audacious check
     To his commands; and work to put him out
     In open act of treason. All which snares
     When his wise cares prevented, a fine poison
     Was thought on, to mature their practices.

                 Enter SEJANUS talking to TERENTIUS,
                 followed by SATRlUS, NATTA, etc.

  Cor. Here comes Sejanus.

  Sil.
     Now observe the stoops,
     The bendings, and the falls.

  Arr. Most creeping base!

  Sej. [to Natta.] I note them well: no more. Say you?

  Sat.
     My lord,
     There is a gentleman of Rome would buy-

  Sej. How call you him you talk'd with?

  Sat.
     Please your lordship,
     It is Eudemus, the physician
     to  Livia, Drusus' wife.

  Sej. On with your suit. Would buy, you said-

  Sat. A tribune's place, my lord.

  Sej. What will he give?

  Sat. Fifty sestertia.

  Sej. Livia's physician, say you, is that fellow?

  Sat. It is, my lord: Your lordship's answer.

  Sej.
     To what?

  Sat.
     The place, my lord. 'Tis for a gentleman
     Your lordship will well like of, when you see him;
     And one, that you may make yours, by the grant.

  Sej.
     Well, let him bring his money, and his name.

  Sat.
     'Thank your lordship. He shall, my lord.

  Sej.
     Come hither.
     Know you this same Eudemus? is he learn'd?

  Sat.
     Reputed so, my lord, and of deep practice.

  Sej.
     Bring him in, to me, in the gallery;
     And take you cause to leave us there together:
     I would confer with him, about a grief----
     On.                  [Exeunt Sejanus, Satrius, Terentius, etc.

  Arr.
     So! yet another? yet? O desperate state
     Of grovelling honour! seest thou this, O sun,
     And do we see thee after? Methinks, day
     Should lose his light, when men do lose their shames,
     And for the empty circumstance of life,
     Betray their cause of living.

  Sil.
     Nothing so.
     Sejanus can repair, if Jove should ruin.
     He is now the court god; and well applied
     With sacrifice of knees, of crooks, and cringes;
     He will do more than all the house of heaven
     Can, for a thousand hecatombs. 'Tis he
     Makes us our day, or night; hell, and elysium
     Are in his look: we talk of Rhadamanth,
     Furies, and firebrands; but it is his frown
     That is all these; where, on the adverse part,
     His smile is more, than e'er yet poets feign'd
     Of bliss, and shades, nectar----

  Arr.
     A serving boy!
     I knew him, at Caius' trencher, when for hire
     He prostituted his abused body
     To that great gormond, fat Apicius;
     And was the noted pathic of the time.

  Sab.
     And, now, the second face of the whole world!
     The partner of the empire, hath his image
     Rear'd equal with Tiberius, born in ensigns;
     Commands, disposes every dignity,
     Centurions, tribunes, heads of provinces,
     Praetors and consuls; all that heretofore
     Rome's general suffrage gave, is now his sale.
     The gain, or rather spoil of all the earth,
     One, and his house, receives.

  Sil.
     He hath of late
     Made him a strength too, strangely, by reducing
     All the praetorian bands into one camp,
     Which he commands: pretending that the soldiers,
     By living loose and scatter'd, fell to riot;
     And that if any sudden enterprise
     Should be attempted, their united strength
     Would be far more than sever'd; and their life
     More strict, if from the city more removed.

  Sab.
     Where, now, he builds what kind of forts he please,
     Is heard to court the soldier by his name,
     Woos, feasts the chiefest men of action,
     Whose wants, not loves, compel them to be his.
     And though he ne'er were liberal by kind,
     Yet to his own dark ends, he's most profuse,
     Lavish, and letting fly, he cares not what
     To his ambition.

  Arr.
     Yet, hath he ambition?
     Is there that step in state can make him higher,
     Or more, or anything he is, but less?

  Sil. Nothing but emperor.

  Arr.
     The name Tiberius,
     I hope, will keep, howe'er he hath foregone
     The dignity and power.

  Sil. Sure, while he lives.

  Arr.
     And dead, it comes to Drusus.
     Should he fail, To the brave issue of Germanicus;
     And they are three: too many-ha? for him
     To have a plot upon!

  Sab.
     I do not know
     The heart of his designs; but, sure, their face
     Looks farther than the present.

  Arr.
     By the gods,
     If I could guess he had but such a thought,
     My sword should cleave him down from head to heart,
     But I would find it out: and with my hand
     I'd hurl his panting brain about the air
     In mites, as small as atomi, to undo
     The knotted bed-

  Sab. You are observ'd, Arruntius.

  Arr. [turns to Natta, Terentius, etc.]
     Death! I dare tell him so; and all his spies:
     You, sir, I would, do you look? and you.

  Sab. Forbear.



                                SCENE II.

                     (The former scene continued.)
           A Gallery discovered opening into the state Room.
                      Enter SATRIUS with EUDEMUS.

  Sat.
     Here he will instant be: let's walk a turn;
     You're in a muse, Eudemus.

  Eud.
     Not I, sir.
     I wonder he should mark me out so! well,
     Jove and Apollo form it for the best.                   [Aside.

  Bat.
     Your  fortune's made unto you now, Eudemus,
     If you can but lay bold upon the means;
     Do but observe his humour, and--believe it--
     He is the noblest Roman, where he takes----

                                    Enter SEJANUS.
     Here comes his lordship.

  Sej. Now, good Satrius.

  Sat. This is the gentleman, my lord.

  Sej.
     Is this?
     Give me your hand--we must be more acquainted.
     Report, sir, hath spoke out your art and learning:
     And I am glad I have so needful cause,
     However in itself painful and hard,
     To make me known to so great virtue.----Look,
     Who is that, Satrius?                           [Exit Sat.]
                            I have a grief, sir,
     That will desire your help. Your name's Eudemus!

  Eud. Yes.

  Sej. Sir?

  Eud. It is, my lord.

  Sej.
     I hear you are
     Physician to Livia, the princess.

  Eud. I minister unto her, my good lord.

  Sej. You minister to a royal lady, then.

  Eud. She is, my, lord, and fair.

  Sej.
     That's understood
     Of all her sex, who are or would be so;
     And those that would be, physic soon can make them:
     For those that are, their beauties fear no colours.

  Eud. Your lordship is conceited.

  Sej.
     Sir, you know it,
     And can, if need be, read a learned lecture
     On this, and other secrets. 'Pray you, tell me,
     What more of ladies besides Livia,
     Have you your patients?

  Eud.
     Many, my good lord.
     The great Augusta, Urgulania,
     Mutilia Prisca, and Plancina;  divers----

  Sej.
     And all these tell you the particulars
     Of every several grief? how first it grew,
     And then increased; what action caused that;
     What passion that: and answer to each point
     That you will put them?

  Eud.
     Else, my lord, we know not
     How to prescribe the remedies.

  Sej.
     Go to,
     you are a subtile nation, you physicians!
     And grown the only cabinets in court,
     To ladies' privacies. Faith, which of these
     Is the most pleasant lady in her physic?
     Come, you are modest now.

  Eud. 'Tis fit, my lord.

  Sej.
     Why, sir, I do not-ask you of their urines,
     Whose smell's most violet, or whose siege is best,
     Or who makes hardest faces on her stool?
     Which lady sleeps with her own face a nights?
     Which puts her teeth off, with her clothes, in court?
     Or, which her hair, which her complexion,
     And, in which box she puts it; These were questions,
     That might, perhaps, have put your gravity
     To some defence of blush. But, I enquired,
     Which was the wittiest, merriest, wantonnest? H
     armless intergatories, but conceits.----
     Methinks Augusta should be most perverse,
     And froward in her fit.

  Eud. She's so, my lord.

  Sej. I knew it: and Mutilia the most jocund.

  Eud. 'Tis very true, my lord.

  Sej.
     And why would you
     Conceal this from me, now? Come, what is Livia?
     I know she's quick and quaintly spirited,
     And will have strange thoughts, when she is at leisure:
     She tells them all to you.

  Eud.
     My noblest lord,
     He breathes not in the empire, or on earth.
     Whom I would be ambitious to serve
     In any act, that may preserve mine honour,
     Before your lordship.

  Sej.
     Sir, you can lose no honour,
     By trusting aught to me. The coarsest act
     Done to my service, I can so requite,
     As all the world shall style it honourable:
     Your idle, virtuous definitions,
     Keep honour poor, and are as scorn'd as vain:
     Those deeds breathe honour that do suck in gain.

  Eud.
     But, good my lord, if I should thus betray
     The counsels of my patient, and a lady's
     Of her high place and worth; what might your lordship,
     Who presently are to trust me with your own,
     Judge of my faith?

  Sej.
     Only the best I swear.
     Say now that I should utter you my grief,
     And with it the true cause; that it were love,
     And love to Livia; you should tell her this:
     Should she suspect your faith; I would you could
     Tell me as much from her; see if my brain
     Could be turn'd jealous.

  Eud.
     Happily, my lord,
     I could in time tell you as much and more;
     So I might safely promise but the first
     To her from you.

  Sej.
     As safely, my Eudemus,
     I now dare call thee so, as I have put
     The secret into thee.

  Eud. My lord----

  Sej.
     Protest not,
     Thy looks are vows to me; use only speed,
     And but affect her with Sejanus' love,
     Thou art a man, made to make consuls. Go.

  Eud.
     My lord, I'll promise you a private meeting
     This day together.

  Sej. Canst thou?

  Eud. Yes.

  Sej. The place?

  Eud.
     My gardens, whither I shall fetch your lordship

  Sej;
     Let me adore my AEsculapius.
     Why, this indeed is physic! and outspeaks
     The knowledge of cheap drugs, or any use
     Can be made out of it! more comforting
     Than all your opiates, juleps, apozems,
     Magistral syrups, or---- Be gone, my friend,
     Not barely styled, but created so;
     Expect things greater than thy largest hopes,
     To overtake thee: Fortune shall be taught
     To know how ill she hath deserv'd thus long,
     To come behind thy wishes. Go, and speed.        [Exit Eudemus.
     Ambition makes more trusty slaves than need.
     These fellows, by the favour of their art,
     Have still the means to tempt; oft-times the power.
     If Livia will be now corrupted, then
     Thou hast the way, Sejanus, to work out
     His secrets, who, thou know'st, endures thee not,
     Her husband, Drusus: and to work against them.
     Prosper it, Pallas, thou that better'st wit;
     For Venus hath the smallest share in it.
                               Enter TIBERIUS and DRUSUS, attended.
  Tib. [to Haterius, who kneels to him.]
     We not endure these flatteries; let him stand;
     Our empire, ensigns, axes, rods and state
     Take not away our human nature from us:
     Look up on us, and fall before the gods.

  Sej. How like a god speaks Caesar!

  Arr.
     There, observe!
     He can endure that second, that's no flattery.
     O, what is it, proud slime will not believe
     Of his own worth, to hear it equal praised
     Thus with the gods!

  Oar. He did not hear it, sir.

  Arr.
     He did not! Tut, he must not, we think meanly.
     'Tis your most courtly known confederacy,
     To have your private parasite redeem,
     What he, in public, subtilely will lose,
     To making him a name.

  Hat. Right mighty lord----             [Gives him letters.

  Tib.
     We must make up our ears 'gainst these assaults
     Of charming tongues; we pray you use no more
     These contumelies to us; style not us
     Or lord, or mighty, who profess ourself
     The servant of the senate, and are proud
     T' enjoy them our good, just, and favouring lords.

  Car. Rarely dissembled!

  Arr. Prince-like to the life.

  Sab.
     When power that may command, so much descends,
     Their bondage, whom it stoops to, it intends.

  Tib. Whence are these letters?

  Hat. From the senate.

  Tib. So.                                 [Lat. gives him letters.
     Whence these?

  Lat. From thence too.

  Tib. Are they sitting now?

  Lat. They stay thy answer, Caesar.

  Sil.
     If this man
     Had but a mind allied unto his words,
     How blest a fate were it to us, and Rome!
     We could not think that state for which to change,
     Although the aim were our old liberty:
     The ghosts of those that fell for that, would grieve
     Their bodies lived not, now, again to serve.
     Men are deceived, who think there can be thrall
     Beneath a virtuous prince: Wish'd liberty
     Ne'er lovelier looks, than under such a crown.
     But, when his grace is merely but lip-good.
     And that, no longer than he airs himself
     Abroad in public, there, to seem to shun
     The strokes and stripes of flatterers, which within
     Are lechery unto him, and so feed
     His brutish sense with their afflicting sound,
     As, dead to virtue, he permits himself
     Be carried like a pitcher by the ears,
     To every act of vice: this is the case
     Deserves our fear, and doth presage the nigh
     And close approach of blood and tyranny.
     Flattery is midwife unto prince's rage:
     And nothing sooner doth help forth a tyrant,
     Than that and whisperers' grace, who have the time,
     The place, the power, to make all men offenders.

  Arr.
     He should be told this; and be bid dissemble
     With fools and blind men: we that know the evil,
     Should hunt the palace-rats or give them bane;
     Fright hence these worse than ravens, that devour T
     he quick, where they but prey upon the dead:
     He shall be told it.

  Sab.
     Stay, Arruntius,
     We must abide our opportunity;
     And practise what is fit, as what is needful.
     It is not safe t' enforce a sovereign's ear:
     Princes hear well, if they at all will hear.

  Arr.
     Ha, say you so? well! In the mean time, Jove,
     (Say not, but I do call upon thee now,)

  Sil. 'Tis well pray'd.

  Tib. [having read the letters.]
    Return the lords this voice,----
    We are their creature,
     And it is fit a good and honest prince,
     Whom they, out of their bounty, have instructed
     With so dilate and absolute a power,
     Should owe the office of it to their service.
     And good of all and every citizen.
     Nor shall it e'er repent us to have wish'd
     The senate just, and favouring lords unto us,
     Since their free loves do yield no less defence
     To a prince's state, than his own innocence.
     Say then, there can be nothing in their thought
     Shall want to please us, that hath pleased them;
     Our suffrage rather shall prevent than stay
     Behind their wills: 'tis empire to obey,
     Where such, so great, so grave, so good determine.
     Yet, for the suit of Spain, to erect a temple
     In honour of our mother and our self,
     We must, with pardon of the senate, not
     Assent thereto. Their lordships may object
     Our not denying the same late request
     Unto the Asian cities: we desire
     That our defence for suffering that be known
     In these brief reasons, with our after purpose.
     Since deified Augustus hindered not
     A temple to be built at Pergamum,
     In honour of himself and sacred Rome;
     We, that have all his deeds and words observed
     Ever, in place of laws, the rather follow'd
     That pleasing precedent, because with ours,
     The senate's reverence, also, there was join'd.
     But as, t' have once received it, may deserve
     The gain of pardon; so, to be adored
     With the continued style, and note of gods,
     Through all the provinces, were wild ambition.
     And no less pride: yea, even Augustus' name
     Would early vanish, should it be profaned
     With such promiscuous flatteries. For our part,
     We here protest it, and are covetous
     Posterity should know it. we are mortal;
     And can but deeds of men: 'twere glory enough,
     Could we be truly a prince. And, they shall add
     Abounding grace unto our memory,
     That shall report us worthy our forefathers,
     Careful of your affairs, constant in dangers,
     And not afraid of any private frown
     For public good. These things shall be to us
     Temples and statues, reared in your minds,
     The fairest, and most during imagery:
     For those of stone or brass, if they become
     Odious in judgment of posterity,
     Are more contemn'd as dying sepulchres,
     Than ta'en for living monuments. We then
     Make here our suit, alike to gods and men;
     The one, until the period of our race,
     To inspire us with a free and quiet mind,
     Discerning both divine and human laws;
     The other, to vouchsafe us after death,
     An honourable mention, and fair praise,
     To accompany our actions and our name:
     The rest of greatness princes may command,
     And, therefore, may neglect; only, a long,
     A lasting, high, and happy memory
     They should, without being satisfied, pursue:
     Contempt of fame begets contempt of virtue.

  Nat. Rare!

  Bat. Most divine!

  Sej.
     The oracles are ceased,
     That only Caesar, with their tongue, might speak.

  Arr. Let me be gone: most felt and open this!

  Cor. Stay.

  Arr.
     What! to hear more cunning and fine words,
     With their sound flatter'd ere their sense be meant?

  Tib.
     Their choice of Antium, there to place the gift
     Vow'd to the goddess for our mother's health,
     We will the senate know, we fairly like:
     As also of their grant to Lepidus,
     For his repairing the AEmilian place,
     And restoration of those monuments:
     Their grace too in confining of Silanus
     To the other isle Cithera, at the suit
     Of his religious sister, much commends
     Their policy, so temper'd with their mercy.
     But for the honours which they have decreed
     To our Sejanus, to advance his statue
     In Pompey's theatre, (whose ruining fire
     His vigilance and labour kept restrain'd
     In that one loss,) they have therein out-gone
     Their own great wisdoms, by their skilful choice,
     And placing of their bounties on a man,
     Whose merit more adorns the dignity,
     Than that can him; and gives a benefit,
     In taking, greater than it can receive.
     Blush not, Sejanus, thou great aid of Rome,
     Associate of our labours, our chief helper;
     Let us not force thy simple modesty
     With offering at thy praise, for more we cannot,
     Since there's no voice can take it.
     No man here Receive our speeches as hyperboles:
     For we are far from flattering our friend,
     Let envy know, as from the need to flatter.
     Nor let them ask the causes of our praise:
     Princes have still their grounds rear'd with themselves,
     Above the poor low flats of common men;
     And who will search the reasons of their acts,
     Must stand on equal bases. Lead, away:
     Our loves unto the senate.
            [Exeunt Tib., Sejan., Natta, Hat., Lat., Officers, etc.

  Arr. Caesar!

  Sab. Peace.

  Cor.
     Great Pompey's theatre  was never ruin'd
     Till now, that proud Sejanus hath a statue
     Rear'd on his ashes.

  Arr.
     Place the shame of soldiers,
     Above the best of generals? crack the world,
     And bruise the name of Romans into dust,
     Ere we behold it!

  Sil. Check your passion; Lord Drusus tarries.

  Dru.
     Is my father mad,
     Weary of life, and rule, lords? thus to heave
     An idol up with praise! make him his mate,
     His rival in the empire!

  Arr. O, good prince.

  Dru.
     Allow him statues, titles, honours, such
     As he himself refuseth!

  Arr. Brave, brave Drusus!

  Dru.
     The first ascents to sovereignty are hard;
     But, entered once, there never wants or means,
     Or ministers, to help the aspirer on.

  Arr. True, gallant Drusus.

  Dru.
     We must shortly pray
     To Modesty, that he will rest contented----

  Arr.
     Ay, where he is, and not write emperor.

              Re-enter SEJANUS, SATBIUS, LATIARIS, Clients, etc.
  Sej.
     There is your bill, and yours; bring you your man.
                                                      [To Satrius.
     I have moved for you, too, Latiaris.

  Dru.
     What!
     Is your vast greatness grown so blindly bold,
     That you will over us?

  Sej. Why then give way.

  Dru.
     Give way, Colossus! do you lift? advance you?
     Take that!                                      [Strikes him.

  Arr. Good!  brave! excellent, brave prince!

  Dru. Nay, come, approach.                          [Draws his sword.
                            What, stand you off? at gaze?
     It looks too full of death for thy cold spirits.
     Avoid mine eye, dull camel, or my sword
     Shall make thy bravery fitter for a grave,
     Than for a triumph. I'll advance a statue
     O' your own bulk; but 't shall be on the cross;
     Where I will nail your pride at breadth and length,
     And crack those sinews, which are yet but stretch'd
     With your swoln fortune's rage.

  Arr. A noble prince!

  All. A Castor, a Castor, a Castor, a Castor!
                                          [Exeunt all but Sejanus.
  Sej.
     He that, with such wrong moved, can bear it through
     With patience, and an even mind, knows how
     To turn it back. Wrath cover'd carries fate:
     Revenge is lost, if I profess my hate.
     What was my practice late, I'll now pursue,
     As my fell justice: this hath styled it new.           [Exit.






ACT II

                   SCENE I.----The Garden of EUDEMUS.
                   Enter SEJANUS, LIVIA, and EUDEMUS.


  Sej.
     Physician, thou art worthy of a province.
     For the great favours done unto our loves;
     And, but that greatest Livia bears a part
     In the requital of thy services,
     I should alone despair of aught, like means,
     To give them worthy satisfaction.

  Liv.
     Eudemus, I will see it, shall receive
     A fit and full reward for his large merit.----
     But for this potion we intend to Drusus,
     No more our husband now, whom shall we choose
     As the most apt and able instrument,
     To minister it to him?

  Eud. I say, Lygdus.

  Sej. Lygdus what's he?

  Liv. An eunuch Drusus loves.

  Eud. Ay, and his cup-bearer.

  Sej.
     Name not a second.
     If Drusus love him, and he have that place,
     We cannot think a fitter.

  Eud.
     True, my lord.
     For free access and trust are two main aids.

  Sej. Skilful physician!

  Liv.
     But he must be wrought
     To the undertaking, with some labour'd art.

  Sej. Is he ambitious?

  Liv. No.

  Sej. Or covetous?

  Liv. Neither.

  Eud. Yet, gold is a good general charm.

  Sej. What is he, then?

  Liv. Faith, only wanton, light.

  Sej. How! is he young and fair?

  Eud. A delicate youth.

  Sej.
     Send him to me, I'll work him.----Royal lady,
     Though I have loved you long, and with that height
     Of zeal and duty, like the fire, which more
     It mounts it trembles, thinking nought could add
     Unto the fervour which your eye had kindled;
     Yet, now I see your wisdom, judgment, strength,
     Quickness, and will, to apprehend the means
     To your own good and greatness, I protest
     Myself through rarified, and turn'd all flame
     In your affection: such a spirit as yours,
     Was not created for the idle second
     To a poor flash, as Drusus; but to shine
     Bright as the moon among the lesser lights,
     And share the sov'reignty of all the world.
     Then Livia triumphs in her proper sphere,
     When she and her Sejanus shall divide
     The name of Caesar, and Augusta' s star
     Be dimm'd with glory of a brighter beam:
     When Agrippina's fires are quite extinct,
     And the scarce-soon Tiberius borrows all
     His little light from us, whose folded arms
     Shall make one perfect orb.                [Knocking within.]
     Who's that! Eudemus, Look.                 [Exit Eudemus.]
     'Tis not Drusus, lady, do not fear.

  Liv.
     Not I, my lord: my fear and love of him
     Left me at once.

  Sej. Illustrious lady, stay----

  Eud. [within.] I'll tell his lordship.        [Re-enter EUDEMUS.

  Sej. Who is it, Eudemus?

  Eud.
     One of your lordship's servants brings you word
     The emperor hath sent for you.

  Sej.
     O! where is he?
     With your fair leave, dear princess, I'll but ask
     A question and return.                       [Exit.

  Eud.
     Fortunate princess!
     How are you blest in the fruition
     Of this unequall'd man, the soul of Rome,
     The empire's life, and voice of Caesar's world!

  Liv.
     So blessed, my Eudemus, as to know
     The bliss I have, with what I ought to owe
     The means that wrought it. How do I look to-day?

  Eud.
     Excellent clear, believe it. This same fucus
     Was well laid on.

  Liv. Methinks 'tis here not white.

  Eud.
     Lend me your scarlet, lady. 'Tis the sun,
     Hath giv'n some little taint unto the ceruse;
     You should have used of the white oil I gave you.
     Sejanus, for your love! his very name
     Commandeth above Cupid or his shafts----         [Paints her cheeks.

  Liv. Nay, now you've made it worse.

  Eud.
     I'll help it straight----
     And but pronounced, is a sufficient charm
     Against all rumour; and of absolute power
     To satisfy for any lady's honour.

  Liv. What do you now, Eudemus?

  Eud.
     Make a light fucus,
     To touch you o'er withal.----Honour'd Sejanus!
     What act, though ne'er so strange and insolent,
     But that addition will at least bear out,
     If't do not expiate?

  Liv. Here, good physician.

  Eud.
     I like this study to preserve the love
     Of such a man, that comes not every hour
     To greet the world.-'Tis now well, lady, you should
     Use of the dentifrice I prescribed you too,
     To clear your teeth, and the prepared pomatum,
     To smooth the skin:----A lady cannot be
     Too curious of her form, that still would hold
     The heart of such a person, made her captive,
     As you have his: who, to endear him more
     In your clear eye, hath put away his wife,
     The trouble of his bed, and your delights,
     Fair Apicata, and made spacious room
     To your new pleasures.

  Liv.
     Have not we return'd
     That with our hate to Drusus, and discovery
     Of all his counsels?

  Eud.
     Yes, and wisely, lady.
     The ages that succeed, and stand far off
     To gaze at your high prudence, shall admire,
     And reckon it an act without your sex:
     It hath that rare appearance. Some will think
     Your fortune could not yield a deeper sound,
     Than mix'd with Drusus; but, when they shall hear
     That, and the thunder of Sejanus meet,
     Sejanus, whose high name doth strike the stars,
     And rings about the concave; great Sejanus,
     Whose glories, style, and titles are himself,
     The often iterating of Sejanus:
     They then will lose their thoughts, and be ashamed
     To take acquaintance of them.
                                                 Be-enter SEJANUS.
  Sej.
     I must make
     A rude departure, lady: Caesar sends
     With all his haste both of command and prayer.
     Be resolute in our plot; you have my soul,
     As certain yours as it is my body's.
     And, wise physician, so prepare the poison,
     As you may lay the subtile operation
     Upon some natural disease of his:
     Your eunuch send to me. I kiss your hands,
     Glory of ladies, and commend my love
     To your best faith and memory.

  Liv.
     My lord,
     I shall but change your words. Farewell.
     Yet, this Remember for your heed, he loves you not;
     You know what I have told you: his designs
     Are full of grudge and danger; we must use
     More than a common speed.

  Sej.
     Excellent lady,
     How you do fire my blood!

  Liv.
     Well, you must go?
     The thoughts be best, are least set forth to shew.
                                                    [Exit Sejanus.

  Eud. When will you take some physic, lady?

  Liv.
     When
     I shall, Eudemus: but let Drusus' drug
     Be first prepared.

  Eud.
     Were Lygdus made, that's done;
     I have it ready. And to-morrow morning
     I'll send you a perfume, first to resolve
     And procure sweat, and then prepare a bath
     To cleanse and clear the cutis; against when
     I'll have an excellent new fucus made,
     Resistive 'gainst the sun, the rain, or wind,
     Which you shall lay on with a breath, or oil,
     As you best like, and last some fourteen hours.
     This change came timely, lady, for your health,
     And the restoring your complexion,
     Which Drusus' choler had almost burnt up!
     Wherein your fortune hath prescribed you better
     Than art could do.

  Liv.
     Thanks, good physician,
     I'll use my fortune, you shall see, with reverence.
     Is my coach ready?

  Eud. It attends your highness.                           [Exeunt



                   SCENE II.----An Apartment in the Palace.
                             Enter SEJANUS.

  Sej.
     If this be not revenge, when I have done
     And made it perfect, let Egyptian slaves,
     Parthians, and bare-foot Hebrews brand my face,
     And print my body full of injuries.
     Thou lost thyself, child Drusus, when thou thoughtst
     Thou couldst outskip my vengeance; or outstand
     The power I had to crush thee into air.
     Thy follies now shall taste what kind of man
     They have provoked, and this thy father's house
     Crack in the flame of my incensed rage,
     Whose fury shall admit no shame or mean.----
     Adultery! it is the lightest ill
     I will commit A race of wicked acts
     Shall flow out of my anger, and o'erspread
     The world's wide face, which no posterity
     Shall e'er approve, nor yet keep silent: things
     That for their cunning, close, and cruel mark,
     Thy father would wish his: and shall, perhaps,
     Carry the empty name, but we the prize.
     On, then, my soul, and start not in thy course;
     Though heaven drop sulphur, and hell belch out fire,
     Laugh at the idle terrors; tell proud Jove,
     Between his power and thine there is no odds:
     'Twas only fear first in the world made gods!
                                       Enter TIBERIUS, attended.
  Tib. Is yet Sejanus come?

  Sej. He's here, dread Caesar.

  Tib.
     Let all depart that chamber, and the next.
                                       [Exeunt Attendants.
     Sit down, my comfort. When the master prince
     Of all the world, Sejanus, saith he fears, Is it not fatal?

  Sewj. Yes, to those are fear'd.

  Tib. And not to him?

  Sej.
     Not, if he wisely turn
     That part of fate he holdeth, first on them.

  Tib. That nature, blood, and laws of kind forbid.

  Sej. Do policy and state forbid it?

  Tib. No.

  Sej.
     The rest of poor respects, then, let go by;
     State is enough to make the act just, them guilty.

  Tib. Long hate pursues such acts.

  Sej.
     Whom hatred frights,
     Let him not dream of sovereignty.

  Tib.
     Are rites
     Of faith, love, piety, to be trod down,
     Forgotten, and made vain?

  Sej.
     All for a crown.
     The prince who shames a tyrant's name to bear,
     Shall never dare do any thing, but fear;
     All the command of sceptres quite doth perish,
     If it begin religious thoughts to cherish:
     Whole empires fall, sway'd by those nice respects;
     It is the license of dark deeds protects
     Ev'n states most hated, when no laws resist
     The sword. but that it acteth what it list.

  Tib.
     Yet so, we may do all things cruelly,
     Not safely.

  Sej. Yes, and do them thoroughly.

  Tib. Knows yet Sejanus whom we point at?

  Sej.
     Ay,
     Or else my thought, my sense, or both do err:
     'Tis Agrippina.

  Tib. She, and her proud race.

  Sej.
     Proud! dangerous, Caesar: for in them apace
     The father's spirit shoots up. Germanicus
     Lives in their looks, their gait, their form, t' upbraid us
     With his close death, if not revenge the same.

  Tib. The act's not known.

  Sej.
     Not proved: but whispering Fame
     Knowledge and proof doth to the jealous give,
     Who, than to fail, would their own thought believe.
     It is not safe, the children draw long breath,
     That are provoked by a parent's death.

  Tib.
     It is as dangerous to make them hence,
     If nothing but their birth be their offence.

  Sej.
     Stay, till they strike at Caesar; then their crime
     Will be enough; but late and out of time For him to punish.

  Tib. Do they purpose it?

  Sej.
     You know, sir, thunder speaks not till it hit.
     Be not secure; none swiftlier are opprest,
     Than they whom confidence betrays to rest.
     Let not your daring make your danger such:
     All power is to be fear'd, where 'tis too much.
     The youths are of themselves hot, violent,
     Full of great thought; and that male-spirited dame,
     Their mother, slacks no means to put them on,
     By large allowance, popular presentings,
     Increase of train and state, suing for titles;
     Hath them commended with like prayers, like vows,
     To the same gods, with Caesar: days and nights
     She spends in banquets and ambitious feasts
     For the nobility; where Caius Silius,
     Titius Sabinus, old Arruntius,
     Asinius Gallus, Furnius, Regulus,
     And others of that discontented list,
     Are the prime guests. There, and to these, she tells
     Whose niece she was, whose daughter, and whose wife.
     And then must they compare her with Augusta,
     Ay, and prefer her too; commend her form,
     Extol her fruitfulness; at which a shower
     Falls for the memory of Germanicus,
     Which they blow over straight with windy praise,
     And puffing hopes of her aspiring sons;
     Who, with these hourly ticklings, grow so pleased,
     And wantonly conceited of themselves,
     As now, they stick not to believe they're such
     As these do give them out; and would be thought
     More than competitors, immediate heirs.
     Whilst to their thirst of rule, they win the rout
     (That's still the friend of novelty) with hope
     Of future freedom, which on every change
     That greedily, though emptily expects.
     Caesar, 'tis age in all things breeds neglects,
     And princes that will keep old dignity
     Must not admit too youthful heirs stand by;
     Not their own issue; but so darkly set
     As shadows are in picture, to give height
     And lustre to themselves.

  Tib.
     We will command
     Their rank thoughts down, and with a stricter hand
     Than we have yet put forth; their trains must bate,
     Their titles, feasts, and factions.

  Sej.
     Or your state.
     But how, sir, will you work!

  Tib. Confine them.

  Sej.
     No.
     They are too great, and that too faint a blow
     To give them now; it would have serv'd at first,
     When with the weakest touch their knot had burst.
     But, now, your care must be, not to detect
     The smallest cord, or line of your suspect;
     For such, who know the weight of prince's fear,
     Will, when they find themselves discover'd, rear
     Their forces, like seen snakes, that else would lie
     Roll'd in their circles, close: nought is more high,
     Daring, or desperate, than offenders found;
     Where guilt is, rage and courage both abound.
     The course must be, to let them still swell up,
     Riot, and surfeit on blind fortune's cup;
     Give them more place, more dignities, more style,
     Call them to court, to senate; in the while,
     Take from their strength some one or twain, or more,
     Of the main factors, (it will fright the store,)
     And, by some by-occasion. Thus, with slight
     You shall disarm them first; and they, in night
     Of their ambition, not perceive the train,
     Till in the engine they are caught and slain.

  Tib.
     We would not kill, if we knew how to save;
     Yet, than a throne, 'tis cheaper give a grave.
     Is there no way to bind them by deserts?

  Sej.
     Sir, wolves do change their hair, but not their hearts.
     While thus your thought unto a mean is tied,
     You neither dare enough, nor do provide.
     All modesty is fond: and chiefly where
     The subject is no less compell'd to bear,
     Than praise his sovereign's acts.

  Tib.
     We can no longer
     Keep on our mask to thee, our dear Sejanus;
     Thy thoughts are ours, in all, and we but proved
     Their voice, in our designs, which by assenting
     Hath more confirm'd us, than if beart'ning Jove
     Had, from his hundred statues, bid us strike,
     And at the stroke click'd all his marble thumbs.
     But who shall first be struck?

  Sej.
     First Caius Silius;
     He is the most of mark, and most of danger:
     In power and reputation equal strong,
     Having commanded an imperial army
     Seven years together, vanquish'd Sacrovir
     In Germany, and thence obtain'd to wear
     The ornaments triumphal. His steep fall,
     By how much it doth give the weightier crack,
     Will send more wounding terror to the rest,
     Command them stand aloof, and give more way
     To our surprising of the principal.

  Tib. But what, Sabinus?

  Sej.
     Let him grow a while,
     His fate is not yet ripe: we must not pluck
     At all together, lest we catch ourselves.
     And there's Arruntius too, he only talks.
     But Sosia, Silius' wife, would be wound in
     Now, for she hath a fury in her breast,
     More than hell ever knew; and would be sent
     Thither in time. Then is there one Cremutius
     Cordus, a writing fellow, they have got
     To gather notes of the precedent times,
     And make them into Annals; a most tart
     And bitter spirit, I hear; who, under colour
     Of praising those, doth tax the present state,
     Censures the men, the actions, leaves no trick,
     No practice unexamined, parallels
     The times, the governments; a profest champion
     For the old liberty-

  Tib.
     A perishing wretch!
     As if there were that chaos bred in things,
     That laws and liberty would not rather choose
     To be quite broken, and ta'en hence by us,
     Than have the stain to be preserved by such.
     Have we the means to make these guilty first?


  Sej.
     Trust that to me: let Caesar, by his power
     But cause a formal meeting of the senate,
     I will have matter and accusers ready.

  Tib. But how? let us consult.

  Sej.
     We shall misspend
     The time of action. Counsels are unfit
     In business, where all rest is more pernicious
     Than rashness can be. Acts of this close kind
     Thrive more by execution than advice.
     There is no lingering in that work begun,
     Which cannot praised be, until through done.

  Tib.
     Our edicts shall forthwith command a court.
     While I can live, I will prevent earth's fury:
                                                     [Exit

                        Enter JULIUS POSTHUMUS.

  Pos. My lord Sejanus----

  Sej.
     Julius Posthumus!
     Come with my wish! What news from Agrippina's?

  Pos.
     Faith, none. They all lock up themselves a' late,
     Or talk in character; I have not seen
     A company so changed. Except they had
     Intelligence by augury of our practice.----

  Sej. When were you there?

  Pos. Last night.

  Sej. And what guests found you?

  Pos. Sabinus, Silius, the old list, Arruntius, Furmus, and Gallus.

  Sej. Would not these talk?

  Pos.
     Little:
     And yet we offer'd choice of argument. Satrius was with me.

  Sej.
     Well: 'tis guilt enough
     Their often meeting. You forgot to extol
     The hospitable lady?

  Pas.
     No; that trick
     Was well put home, and had succeeded too,
     But that Sabinus cough'd a caution out;
     For she began to swell.

  Sej.
     And may she burst!
     Julius, I would have you go instantly
     Unto the palace of the great Augusta,
     And, by your kindest friend, get swift access;
     Acquaint her with these meetings: tell the words
     You brought me the other day, of Silius,
     Add somewhat to them. Make her understand
     The danger of Sabinus, and the times,
     Out of his closeness. Give Arruntius' words
     Of malice against Caesar; so, to Gallus:
     But, above all, to Agrippina. Say,
     As you may truly, that her infinite pride,
     Propt with the hopes of her too fruitful womb,
     With popular studies gapes for sovereignty,
     And threatens Caesar. Pray Augusta then,
     That for her own, great Caesar's, and the public
     safety, she be pleased to urge these dangers.
     Caesar is too secure, he must be told,
     And best he'll take it from a mother's tongue.
     Alas! what is't for us to sound, to explore,
     To watch, oppose, plot, practise, or prevent,
     If he, for whom it is so strongly labour'd,
     Shall, out of greatness and free spirit, be
     Supinely negligent? our city's now
     Divided as in time o' the civil war,
     And men forbear not to declare themselves
     Of Agrippina's party. Every day
     The faction multiplies; and will do more,
     If not resisted: you can best enlarge it,
     As you find audience. Noble Posthumus,
     Commend me to your Prisca: and pray her,
     She will solicit this great business,
     To earnest and most present execution,
     With all her utmost credit with Augusta.

  Pos. I shall not fail in my instructions.                [Exit.

  Sej.
     This second, from his mother, will well urge
     Our late design, and spur on Caesar's rage;
     Which else might grow remiss. The way to put
     A prince in blood, is to present the shapes
     Of dangers, greater than they are, like late,
     Or early shadows; and, sometimes, to feign
     Where there are none, only to make him fear?
     His fear will make him cruel: and once enter'd,
     He doth not easily learn to stop, or spare
     Where he may doubt. This have I made my rule,
     To thrust Tiberius into tyranny,
     And make him toil, to turn aside those blocks,
     Which I alone could not remove with safety,
     Drusus once gone, Germanicus' three sons
     Would clog my way; whose guards have too much faith
     To be corrupted: and their mother known
     Of too, too unreproved a chastity,
     To be attempted, as light Livia was.
     Work then, my art, on Caesar's fears, as they
     On those they fear 'till all my lets be clear'd,
     And he in ruins of his house, and hate
     Of all his subjects, bury his own state;
     When with my peace and safety, I will rise,
     By making him the public sacrifice.                    [Exit.


              SCENE III.-A Room in AGRIPPINA'S House.
                  Enter SATRlUS and NATTA.
  Sat. They're grown exceeding circumspect, and wary.

  Nat.
     They have us in the wind: and yet Arruntius
     Cannot contain himself.

  Sat.
     Tut, he's not yet
     Look'd after; there are others more desired
     That are more silent.

  Nat. Here he comes. Away.                               [Exeunt.

             Enter SABINUS, ARRUNTIUS, and CORDUS

  Sab.
     How is it, that these beagles haunt the house
     Of Agrippina?

  Arr.
     O, they hunt, they hunt!
     There is some game here lodged, which they must rouse,
     To make the great ones sport.

  Cor.
     Did you observe
     How they inveigh'd 'gainst Caesar?

  Arr.
     Ay, baits, baits,
     For us to bite at: would I have my flesh
     Torn by the public hook, these qualified hangmen
     Should be my company.

  Cor. Here comes another.        [Dom. Afer passes over the stage

  Arr.
     Ay, there's a man, Afer the orator!
     One that hath phrases, figures, and fine flowers,
     To strew his rhetoric with, and doth make haste,
     To get him note, or name, by any offer
     Where blood or gain be objects; steeps his words,
     When he would kill, in artificial tears:
     The crocodile of Tyber! him I love,
     That man is mine; he hath my heart and voice
     When I would curse! he, he.

  Sub.
     Contemn the slaves,
     Their present lives will be their future graves.     [Exeunt


                   SCENE IV.-Another Apartment in the same.
                  Enter SILIUS, AGRIPPINA, NERO, and SOSIA.

  Sil.
     May't please your highness not forget yourself;
     I dare not, with my manners, to attempt
     Your trouble farther.

  Agr. Farewell, noble Silius!

  Sil. Most royal princess.

  Agr. Sosia stays with us?

  Sil.
     She is your servant, and doth owe your grace
     An honest, but unprofitable love.

  Agr. How can that be, when there's no gain but virtue's?

  Sil:
     You take the moral, not the politic sense.
     I meant, as she is bold, and free of speech,
     Earnest to utter what her zealous thought
     Travails withal, in honour of your house;
     Which act, as it is simply born in her,
     Partakes of love and honesty; but may,
     By the over-often, and unseason'd use,
     Turn to your loss and danger: for your state
     Is waited on by envies, as by eyes;
     And every second guest your tables take
     Is a fee'd spy, to observe who goes, who comes;
     What conference you have, with whom, where, when.
     What the discourse is, what the looks, the thoughts
     Of every person there, they do extract,
     And make into a substance.

  Agr.
     Hear me, Silius.
     Were all Tiberius' body stuck with eyes,
     And every wall and hanging in my house
     Transparent, AS this lawn I wear, or air;
     Yea, had Sejanus both his ears as long
     As to my inmost closet, I would hate
     To whisper any thought, or change an act,
     To be made Juno's rival. Virtue's forces
     Shew ever noblest in conspicuous courses.

  Sil.
     'Tis great, and bravely spoken, like the spirit
     Of Agrippina: yet, your highness knows,
     There is nor loss nor shame in providence;
     Few can, what all should do, beware enough.
     You may perceive with what officious face,
     Satrius, and Natta, Afer, and the rest.
     Visit your house, of late, to enquire the secrets;
     And with what bold and privileged art, they rail
     Against Augusta, yea, and at Tiberius;
     Tell tricks of Livia, and Sejanus; all
     To excite, and call your indignation on,
     That they might hear it at more liberty.

  Agr. You're too suspicious, Silius.

  Sil.
     Pray the gods,
     I be so, Agrippina; but I fear
     Some subtle practice. They that durst to strike
     At so exampless, and unblamed a life,
     As that of the renowned Germanicus,
     Will not sit down with that exploit alone:
     He threatens many that hath injured one.

  Nero.
     'Twere best rip forth their tongues, sear out their eyes.
     When next they come.

  Sos. A fit reward for spies.
                                     Enter Drusus, jun.
  Dru. jun. Hear you the rumour?

  Agr. What?

  Dru. jun. Drusus is dying.

  Agr. Dying!

  Nero. That's strange!

  Agr. You were with him yesternight.

  Dru. jun.
     One met Eudemus the physician,
     Sent for, but now; who thinks he cannot live.

  Sil.
     Thinks! if it be arrived at that, he knows,
     Or none.

  Agr. 'Tis quick! what should be his disease?

  Sil. Poison, poison-

  Agr. How, Silius!

  Nero. What's that?

  Sil.
     Nay, nothing. There was late a certain blow
     Given o' the face.

  Nero. Ay, to Sejanus.

  Sil. True!

  Dru. jun. And what of that?

  Sil. I'm glad I gave it not.

  Nero. But there is somewhat else?

  Sil.
     Yes, private meetings,
     With a great lady [sir], at a physician's,
     And a wife turn'd away.

  Nero. Ha!

  Sil.
     Toys, mere toys:
     What wisdom's now in th' streets, in the common mouth?

  Dru. fun.
     Fears, whisperings, tumults, noise,
     I know not what: They say the Senate sit.

  Sil.
     I'll thither straight;
     And see what's in the forge.

  Agr. Good Silius do; Sosia and I will in.

  Sil.
     Haste you, my lords, I
     To visit the sick prince; tender your loves,
     And sorrows to the people. This Sejanus,
     Trust my divining soul, hath plots on all:
     No tree, that stops his prospect, but must fall.      [Exeunt.





ACT III

                       SCENE I.-The Senate-House
     Enter Praenes, Lictores, SEJANUS, VARRO, LATIARIS, COTTA, and AFER

  Sej.
     'Tis only you must urge against him, Varro;
     Nor I nor Caesar may appear therein,
     Except in your defence, who are the consul;
     And, under colour of late enmity
     Between your father and his, may better do it,
     As free from all suspicion of a practice.
     Here be your notes, what points to touch at; read:
     Be cunning in them. Afer has them too.

  Var. But is he summon'd?

  Sej.
     No. It was debated
     By Caesar, and concluded as most fit
     To take him unprepared.

  Afer.
     And prosecute
     All under name of treason.

  Var. I conceive.
                  Enter SABINUS, GALLUS, LEPIDUS, and ARRUNTIUS.
  Sab. Drusus being dead, Caesar will not be here.

  Gal. What should the business of this senate be?

  Arr.
     That can my subtle whisperers tell you: we
     That are the good-dull-noble lookers on,
     Are only call'd to keep the marble warm.
     What should we do with those deep mysteries,
     Proper to these fine heads? let them alone.
     Our ignorance may, perchance, help us be saved
     From whips and furies.

  Gall. See, see, see their action!

  Arr.
     Ay, now their heads do travail, now they work;
     Their faces run like shittles; they are weaving
     Some curious cobweb to catch flies.

  Sab.
     Observe,
     They take their places.

  Arr. What, so low!

  Gal.
     O yes,
     They must be seen to flatter Caesar's grief,
     Though but in sitting.

  Var. Bid us silence.

  Prae. Silence!

  Var.
     Fathers conseript, may this our present meeting,
     Turn fair, and fortunate to the common-wealth!
                                 Enter SILIUS, and other Senators.
  Sej. See, Silius enters.

  Sil. Hail, grave fathers!

  Lic.
     Stand.
     Silius, forbear thy place.

  Ben. How!

  Prae.
     Silius, stand forth,
     The consul hath to charge thee.

  Lic. Room for Caesar.

  Arr. Is he come too! nay then expect a trick.

  Sab. Silius accused! sure he will answer nobly.
                                         Enter TIBERIUS, attended.
  Tib.
     We stand amazed, fathers, to behold
     This general dejection. Wherefore sit
     Rome's consuls thus dissolved, as they had lost
     All the remembrance both of style and place
     It not becomes. No woes are of fit weight,
     To make the honour of the empire stoop:
     Though I, in my peculiar self, may meet
     Just reprehension, that so suddenly,
     And, in so fresh a grief, would greet the senate,
     When private tongues, of kinsmen and allies,
     Inspired with comforts, lothly are endured,
     The face of men not seen, and scarce the day,
     To thousands that communicate our loss.
     Nor can I argue these of weakness; since
     They take but natural ways; yet I must seek
     For stronger aids, and those fair helps draw out
     From warm embraces of the common-wealth.
     Our mother, great Augusta, 's struck with time,
     Our self imprest with aged characters,
     Drusus is gone, his children young and babes;
     Our aims must now reflect on those that may
     Give timely succour to these present ills,
     And are our only glad-surviving hopes,
     The noble issue of Germanicus,
     Nero and Drusus: might it please the consul
     Honour them in, they both attend without.
     I would present them to the senate's care,
     And raise those suns of joy that should drink up
     These floods of sorrow in your drowned eyes.

  Arr.
      By Jove, I am not OEdipus enough
      To understand this Sphynx.

  Sab. The princes come.
                                   Enter NERO, and DRUSUS, junior.
  Tib.
     Approach you, noble Nero, noble Drusus.
     These princes, fathers, when their parent died,
     I gave unto their uncle, with this prayer,
     That though he had proper issue of his own,
     He would no less bring up, and foster these,
     Than that self-blood; and by that act confirm
     Their worths to him, and to posterity.
     Drusus ta'en hence, I turn my prayers to you,
     And 'fore our country, and our gods, beseech
     You take, and rule Augustus' nephew's sons,
     Sprung of the noblest ancestors; and so
     Accomplish both my duty, and your own,
     Nero, and Drusus, these shall be to you
     In place of parents, these your fathers, these;
     And not unfitly: for you are so born,
     As all your good, or ill's the common-wealth's.
     Receive them, you strong guardians; and blest gods,
     Make all their actions answer to their bloods:
     Let their great titles find increase by them,
     Not they by titles. Set them as in place,
     So in example, above all the Romans:
     And may they know no rivals but themselves.
     Let Fortune give them nothing; but attend
     Upon their virtue: and that still come forth
     Greater than hope, and better than their fame.
     Relieve me, fathers, with your general voice.

  Senators.
     May all the gods consent to Caesar's wish,
     And add to any honours that may crown
     The hopeful issue of Germanicus

  Tib. We thank you, reverend fathers, in their right.

  Arr.
     If this were true now! but the space, the space
     Between the breast and lips----Tiberius' heart
     Lies a thought further than another man's.          [Aside.

  Tib.
     My comforts are so flowing in my joys,
     As, in them, all my streams of grief are lost,
     No less than are land-waters in the sea,
     Or showers in rivers; though their cause was such,
     As might have sprinkled ev'n the gods with tears:
     Yet, since the greater doth embrace the less,
     We covetously obey.

  Arr. Well acted, Caesar.                                [Aside.

  Tib.
     And now I am the happy witness made
     Of your so much desired affections
     To this great issue, I could wish, the
     Fates Would here set peaceful period to my days;
     However to my labours, I entreat,
     And beg it of this senate, some fit ease.

  Arr. Laugh, fathers, laugh: have you no spleens about you?
                                                          [Aside.
  Tib.
      The burden is too heavy I sustain
      On my unwilling shoulders; and I pray
      It may be taken off, and reconferred
      Upon the consuls, or some other Roman,
      More able, and more worthy.

  Arr. Laugh on still.                                     [Aside.

  Sab. Why this doth render all the rest suspected!

  Gal. It poisons all.

  Arr. O, do you taste it then?

  Sab.
     It takes away my faith to any thing,
     He shall hereafter speak.

  Arr.
     Ay, to pray that,
     Which would be to his head as hot as thunder,
     'Gainst which he wears that charm should but the court
     Receive him at his word.

  Gal. Hear!

  Tib.
     For myself
     I know my weakness, and so little covet,
     Like some gone past, the weight that will oppress me,
     As my ambition is the counter-point.

  Arr. Finely maintained; good still!

  Sej.
     But Rome, whose blood,
     Whose nerves, whose life, whose very frame relies
     On Caesar's strength, no less than heaven on Atlas,
     Cannot admit it but with general ruin.

  Arr. Ah! are you there to bring him off?                 [Aside.

  Sej.
     Let Caesar
     No more then urge a point so contrary
     To Caesar's greatness, the grieved senate's vows,
     Or Rome's necessity.

  Gal. He comes about----

  Arr. More nimbly than Vertumnus.

  Tib.
     For the publick,
     I may be drawn to shew I can neglect
     All private aims, though I affect my rest;
     But if the senate still command me serve,
     I must be glad to practise my obedience.

  Arr. You must and will, sir. We do know it.            [Aside.

  Senators.
     Caesar,
     Live long and happy, great and royal Caesar;
     The gods preserve thee and thy modesty,
     Thy wisdom and thy innocence

  Arr.
     Where is't?
     The prayer is made before the subject.                [Aside.

  Senators.
     Guard
     His meekness, Jove; his piety, his care,
     His bounty----

  Arr.
     And his subtility, I'll put in:
     Yet he'll keep that himself, without the gods.
     All prayers are vain for him.                        [Aside.
  Tib.
     We will not hold
     Your patience, fathers, with long answer; but
     Shall still contend to be what you desire,
     And work to satisfy so great a hope.
     Proceed to your affairs.

  Arr.
     Now, Silius, guard thee;
     The curtain's drawing. Afer advanceth.                [Aside.

  Prae. Silence!

  Afer. Cite Caius Silius.

  Prae. Caius Silius!

  Sil. Here.

  Afer.
     The triumph that thou hadst in Germany
     For thy late victory on Sacrovir,
     Thou hast enjoy'd so freely, Caius Silius,
     As no man it envied thee; nor would Caesar,
     Or Rome admit, that thou wert then defrauded
     Of any honours thy deserts could claim,
     In the fair service of the common-wealth:
     But now, if, after all their loves and graces,
     (Thy actions, and their courses being discover'd)
     It shall appear to Caesar and this senate,
     Thou hast defiled those glories with thy crimes----

  Sil. Crimes!

  Afer. Patience, Silius.

  Sil.
     Tell thy mule of patience;
     I am a Roman. What are my crimes? proclaim them.
     Am I too rich, too honest for the times?
     Have I or treasure, jewels, land, or houses
     That some informer gapes for? is my strength
     Too much to be admitted, or my knowledge?
     These now are crimes.

  Afer.
      Nay, Silius, if the name
     Of crime so touch thee, with what impotence
     Wilt thou endure the matter to be search'd?

  Sil.
     I tell thee, Afer, with more scorn than fear:
     Employ your mercenary tongue and art.
     Where's my accuser?

  Var. Here.

  Arr.
     Varro, the consul!
     Is he thrust in?                                      [Aside.

  Var.
     'Tis I accuse thee, Silius.
     Against the majesty of Rome, and Caesar,
     I do pronounce thee here a guilty cause,
     First of beginning and occasioning,
     Next, drawing out the war in Gallia,
     For which thou late triumph'st; dissembling long
     That Sacrovir to be an enemy,
     Only to make thy entertainment more.
     Whilst thou, and thy wife Sosia, poll'd the province:
     Wherein, with sordid, base desire of gain,
     Thou hast discredited thy actions' worth,
     And been a traitor to the state.

  Sil. Thou liest.

  Arr. I thank thee, Silius, speak so still and often.

  Var.
     If I not prove it, Caesar, but unjustly
     Have call'd him into trial; here I bind
     Myself to suffer, what I claim against him;
     And yield to have what I have spoke, confirm'd
     By judgment of the court, and all good men.

  Sil.
     Caesar, I crave to have my cause deferr'd,
     Till this man's consulship be out.

  Tib.
     We cannot,
     Nor may we grant it.

  Sil.
     Why? shall he design
     My day of trial? Is he my accuser,
     And must he be my judge?

  Tib.
     It hath been usual,
     And is a right that custom hath allow'd
     The magistrate, to call forth private men;
     And to appoint their day: which privilege
     We may not in the consul see infringed,
     By whose deep watches, and industrious care
     It is so labour'd, as the common-wealth
     Receive no loss, by any oblique course.

  Sil. Caesar, thy fraud is worse than violence.

  Tib.
     Silius, mistake us not, we dare not use
     The credit of the consul to thy wrong;
     But only to preserve his place and power,
     So far as it concerns the dignity
     And honour of the state.

  Arr. Believe him, Silius.

  Cot. Why, so he may, Arruntius.

  Arr.
     I say so.
     And he may choose too.

  Tib.
     By the Capitol,
     And all our gods, but that the dear republic,
     Our sacred laws, and just authority
     Are interess'd therein, I should be silent.

  Afer.
     'Please Caesar to give way unto his trial,
     He shall have justice.

  Sil.
     Nay, I shall have law;
     Shall I not, Afer? speak.

  Afer. Would you have more?

  Sil.
     No, my well-spoken man, I would no more;
     Nor less: might I enjoy it natural,.
     Not taught to speak unto your present ends,
     Free from thine, his, and all your unkind handling,
     Furious enforcing, most unjust presuming,
     Malicious, and manifold applying,
     Foul wresting, and impossible construction.

  Afer. He raves, he raves.

  Sil.
     Thou durst not tell me so,
     Hadst thou not Crease's warrant.
     I can see Whose power condemns me.

  Var.
     This betrays his spirit:
     This doth enough declare him what he is.

  Sil. What am I? speak.

  Var. An enemy to the state.

  Sil.
     Because I am an enemy to thee,
     And such corrupted ministers o' the state,
     That here art made a present instrument
     To gratify it with thine own disgrace.

  Sej.
     This, to the consul, is most insolent,
     And impious.

  Sil.
     Ay, take part. Reveal yourselves,
     Alas! I scent not your confederacies,
     Your plots, and combinations! I not know
     Minion Sejanus hates me: and that all,
     This boast of law, and law, is but a form,
     A net of Vulcan's filing, a mere ingine,
     To take that life by a pretext of justice,
     Which you pursue in malice! I want brain,
     Or nostril to persuade me, that your ends,
     And purposes are made to what they are,
     Before my answer! O, you equal gods,
     Whose justice not a world of wolf-turn'd men
     Shall make me to accuse, howe'er provoked;
     Have I for this so oft engaged myself?
     Stood in the heat and fervour of a fight,
     When Phoebus sooner hath forsook the day
     Than I the field, against the blue-eyed Gauls,
     And crisped Germans? when our Roman eagles
     Have fann'd the fire, with their labouring wings,
     And no blow dealt, that left not death behind it?
     When I have charged, alone, into the troops
     Of curl'd Sicambrians, routed them, and came
     Not off, with backward ensigns of a slave;
     But forward marks, wounds on my breast and face,
     Were meant to thee, O Caesar, and thy Rome?
     And have I this return!  did I, for this,
     Perform so noble and so brave defeat
     On Sacrovir! O Jove, let it become me
     To boast my deeds, when he whom they concern,
     Shall thus forget them.

  Afer.
     Silius, Silius,
     These are the common customs of thy blood,
     When it is high with wine, as now with rage:
     This well agrees with that intemperate vaunt,
     Thou lately mad'st at Agrippina's table,
     That, when all other of the troops were prone
     To fall into rebellion, only thine
     Remain'd in their obedience. Thou wert he
     That saved the empire, which had then been lost
     Had but thy legions, there, rebell'd, or mutined;
     Thy virtue met, and fronted every peril.
     Thou gav'st to Caesar, and to Rome their surety;
     Their name, their strength, their spirit, and their state,
     Their being was a donative from thee.

  Arr. Well worded, and most like an orator.

  Tib. Is this true, Silius?

  Sil.
     Save thy question, Caesar;
     Thy spy of famous credit hath affirm'd it.

  Arr. Excellent Roman!

  Sab. He doth answer stoutly.

  Sej.
     If this be so, there needs no farther cause
     Of crime against him.

  Var.
     What can more impeach
     The royal dignity and state of Caesar,
     Than to be urged with a benefit He cannot pay?

  Cot.
     In this, all Ceesar's fortune
     Is made unequal to the courtesy.

  Lat. His means are clean destroyed that should requite.

  Gal. Nothing is great enough for Silius' merit.

  Arr. Gallus on that side too!                           [Aside.

  Sil.
     Come, do not hunt,
     And labour so about for circumstance,
     To make him guilty whom you have foredoom'd:
     Take shorter ways, I'll meet your purposes.
     The words were mine, and more I now will say:
     Since I have done thee that great service, Caesar,
     Thou still hast fear'd me; and in place of grace,
     Return'd me hatred: so soon all best turns,
     With doubtful princes, turn deep injuries
     In estimation, when they greater rise
     Than can be answer'd. Benefits, with you,
     Are of no longer pleasure, than you can
     With ease restore them; that transcended once,
     Your studies are not how to thank, but kill.
     It is your nature, to have all men slaves
     To you, but you acknowledging to none.
     The means that make your greatness, must not come
     In mention of it; if it do, it takes
     So much away, you think: and that which help'd,
     Shall soonest perish, if it stand in eye,
     Where it may front, or but upbraid the high.

  Got. Suffer him speak no more.

  Var. Note but his spirit.

  Afer. This shews him in the rest.

  Lat. Let him be censured.
  Sej. He hath spoke enough to prove him Caesar's foe.

  Got. His thoughts look through his words.

  Sej. A censure.

  Sil.
     Stay,
     Stay, most officious senate, I shall straight
     Delude thy fury. Silius hath not placed
     His guards within him, against fortune's spite,
     So weakly, but he can escape your gripe
     That are but hands of fortune: she herself,
     When virtue doth oppose, must lose her threats!
     All that can happen in humanity,
     The frown of Caesar, proud Sejanus' hatred,
     Base Varro's spleen, and Afer's bloodying tongue,
     The senate's servile flattery, and these
     Muster'd to kill, I'm fortified against;
     And can look down upon: they are beneath me.
     It is not life whereof I stand enamour'd;
     Nor shall my end make me accuse my fate.
     The coward and the valiant man must fall,
     Only the cause and manner how, discerns them:
     Which then are gladdest, when they cost us dearest.
     Romans, if any here be in this senate,
     Would know to mock Tiberius' tyranny,
     Look upon Silius, and so learn to die.         [Stabs himself.

  Var. O desperate act!

  Arr. An honourable hand!

  Tib. Look, is he dead?

  Sab. 'Twas nobly struck, and home.

  Arr.
     My thought did prompt him to it. Farewell. Silius.
     Be famous ever for thy great example.

  Tib.
     We are not pleased in this sad accident,
     That thus hath stalled, and abused our mercy,
     Intended to preserve thee, noble Roman,
     And to prevent thy hopes.

  Arr.
     Excellent wolf!
     Now he is full he howls.                              [Aside.

  Sej.
     Caesar doth wrong
     His dignity and safety thus to mourn
     The deserv'd end of so profest a traitor,
     And doth, by this his lenity, instruct
     Others as factious to the like offence.

  Tib.
     The confiscation merely of his state
     Had been enough.

  Arr. O, that was gaped for then?                          [Aside.

  Var. Remove the body.

  Sej. Let citation Go out for Sosia.

  Gal.
     Let her be proscribed:
     And for the goods, I think it fit that half
     Go to the treasure, half unto the children.

  Lep.
     With leave of Caesar, I would think that fourth,
     The which the law doth cast on the informers,
     Should be enough; the rest go to the children.
     Wherein the prince shall shew humanity,
     And bounty; not to force them by their want,
     Which in their parents' trespass they deserv'd,
     To take ill courses.

  Tib. It shall please us.

  Arr.
     Ay,
     Out of necessity. This Lepidus
     Is grave and honest, and I have observed
     A moderation still in all his censures.

  Sab.
     And bending to the better----Stay, who's this?

             Enter SATRIUS and NATTA, with CREMUTIUS CORDUS guarded.

     Cremutius Cordus! What! is he brought in?

  Arr.
     More blood into the banquet! Noble Cordus,
     I wish thee good: be as thy writings, free,
     And honest.

  Tib. What is he?

  Sej. For the Annals, Caesar.

  Prae. Cremutius Cordus!

  Cor. Here.

  Prae.
     Satrius Secundus,
     Pinnarius Natta, you are his accusers.

  Arr.
     Two of Sejanus' blood-hounds, whom he breeds
     With human flesh, to bay at citizens.

  Afer. Stand forth before the senate, and confront him.

  Sat.
     I do accuse thee here, Cremutius Cordus,
     To be a man factious and dangerous,
     A sower of sedition in the state,
     A turbulent and discontented spirit,
     Which I will prove from thine own writings, here,
     The Annals thou hast publish'd; where thou bit'st
     The present age, and with a viper's tooth,
     Being a member of it, dar'st that ill
     Which never yet degenerous bastard did
     Upon his parent.

  Nat.
     To this, I subscribe;
     And, forth a world of more particulars,
     Instance in only one: comparing men,
     And times, thou praisest Brutus, and affirm'st
     That Cassius was the last of all the Romans.

  Cot. How! what are we then?

  Var. What is Caesar? nothing?

  Afer.
     My lords, this strikes at every Roman's private,
     In whom reigns gentry, and estate of spirit,
     To have a Brutus brought in parallel,
     A parricide, an enemy of his country,
     Rank'd, and preferr'd to any real worth
     That Rome now holds. This is most strangely invective,
     Most full of spite, and insolent upbraiding.
     Nor is't the time alone is here disprised,
     But the whole man of time, yea, Caesar's self
     Brought in disvalue; and he aimed at most,
     By oblique glance of his licentious pen.
     Caesar, if Cassius were the last of Romans,
     Thou hast no name.

  Tib. Let's hear him answer. Silence!

  Cor.
     So innocent I am of fact, my lords,
     As but my words are argued: yet those words
     Not reaching either prince or prince's parent:
     The which your law of treason comprehends.
     Brutus and Cassius I am charged to have praised;
     Whose deeds, when many more, besides myself,
     Have writ, not one hath mention'd without honour.
     Great Titus Livius, great for eloquence,
     And faith amongst us, in his history,
     With so great praises Pompey did extol,
     As oft Augustus call'd him a Pompeian:
     Yet this not hurt their friendship. In his book
     He often names Scipio, Afranius,
     Yea, the same Cassius, and this Brutus too,
     As worthiest men; not thieves and parricides,
     Which notes upon their fames are now imposed.
     Asinius Pollio's writings quite throughout
     Give them a noble memory; so Messala
     Renown'd his general Cassius: yet both these
     Lived with Augustus, full of wealth and honours,
     To Cicero's book, where Cato was heav'd up
     Equal with Heaven, what else did Caesar answer,
     Being then dictator, but with a penn'd oration,
     As if before the judges? Do but see
     Antonius' letters; read but Brutus' pleadings:
     What vile reproach they hold against Augustus,
     False, I confess, but with much bitterness.
     The epigrams of Bibaculus and Catullus
     Are read, full stuft with spite of both the Caesars;
     Yet deified Julius, and no less Augustus,
     Both bore them, and contemn'd them: I not know,
     Promptly to speak it, whether done with more
     Temper, or wisdom; for such obloquies
     If they despised be, they die supprest;
     But if with rage acknowledg'd, they are confest.
     The Greeks I slip, whose license not alone,
     But also lust did scape unpunished:
     Or where some one, by chance, exception took,
     He words with words revenged. But, in my work,
     What could be aim'd more free, or farther off
     From the time's scandal, than to write of those,
     Whom death from grace or hatred had exempted?
     Did I, with Brutus and with Cassius,
     Arm'd, and possess'd of the Philippi fields,
     Incense the people in the civil cause,
     With dangerous speeches? Or do they, being slain
     Seventy years since, as by their images,
     Which not the conqueror hath defaced, appears,
     Retain that guilty memory with writers?
     Posterity pays every man his honour;
     Nor shall there want, though I condemned am,
     That will not only Cassius well approve,
     And of great Brutus' honour mindful be,
     But that will also mention make of me.

  Arr. Freely and nobly spoken!

  Sab.
     With good temper;
     I like him, that he is not moved with passion.

  Arr. He puts them to their whisper.

  Tib.
     Take him hence;
     We shall determine of him at next sitting.
                                      [Exeunt Officers with Cordus.
  Cot.
     Mean time, give order, that his books be burnt,
     To the aediles.

  Sej. You have well advised.

  Afer.
     It fits not such licentious things should live
     T'upbraid the age.

  Arr. If the age were good, they might.

  Lat. Let them be burnt.

  Gal. All sought, and burnt to-day.

  Prae. The court is up; lictors, resume the fasces.
                  [Exeunt all but Arruntius, Sabinus, and Lepidus.
  Arr.
     Let them be burnt! O, how ridiculous
     Appears the senate's brainless diligence,
     Who think they can, with present power, extinguish
     The memory of all succeeding times!

  Sab.
     'Tis true; when, contrary, the punishment
     Of wit, doth make the authority increase.
     Nor do they aught, that use this cruelty
     Of interdiction, and this rage of burning,
     But purchase to themselves rebuke and shame,
     And to the writers an eternal name.

  Lep.
     It is an argument the times are sore,
     When virtue cannot safely be advanced;
     Nor vice reproved.

  Arr.
     Ay, noble Lepidus;
     Augustus well foresaw what we should suffer
     Under Tiberius, when he did pronounce
     The Roman race most wretched, that should live
     Between so slow jaws, and so long a bruising.       [Exeunt.




                 SCENE II.----A Room in the Palace.
                   Enter TIBERIUS and SEJANUS.

  Tib.
     This business hath succeeded well, Sejanus,
     And quite removed all jealousy of practice
     'Gainst Agrippina, and our nephews. Now,
     We must bethink us how to plant our ingine,
     For th' other pair, Sabinus and Arruntius,
     And Gallus too: howe'er he flatter us,
     His heart we know.

  Sej.
     Give it some respite, Caesar.
     Time shall mature, and bring to perfect crown,
     What we, with so good vultures have begun:
     Sabinus shall be next.

  Tib. Rather Arruntius.

  Sej.
     By any means, preserve him. His frank tongue
     Being let the reins, would take away all thought
     Of malice, in your course against the rest:
     We must keep him to stalk with.

  Tib.
     Dearest head,
     To thy most fortunate design I yield it.

  Sej.
     Sir,----I have been so long train'd up in grace,
     First with your father, great Augustus; since,
     With your most happy bounties so familiar
     As I not sooner would commit my hopes
     Or wishes to the gods. than to your ears.
     Nor have I ever, yet, been covetous
     Of over-bright and dazzling honour; rather
     To watch and travail in great Caesar's safety,
     With the most common soldier.

  Tib. 'Tis confest.

  Sej.
     The only gain, and which I count most fair
     Of all my fortunes, is, that mighty Caesar
     Has thought me worthy his alliance. Hence
     Begin my hopes.

  Tib. Umph!

  Sej.
     I have heard, Augustus,
     In the bestowing of his daughter, thought
     But even of gentlemen of Rome: if so,----
     I know not how to hope so great a favour----
     But if a husband should be sought for Livia,
     And I he had in mind, as Caesar's friend,
     I would but use the glory of the kindred:
     It should not make me slothful, or less caring
     For Caesar's state: it were enough to me
     It did confirm, and strengthen my weak house,
     Against the now unequal opposition
     Of Agrippina; and for dear regard
     Unto my children, this I wish: myself
     Have no ambition farther than to end
     My days in service of so dear a master.

  Tib.
     We cannot but commend thy piety,
     Most loved Sejanus, in acknowledging
     Those bounties; which we, faintly, such remember----
     But to thy suit. The rest of mortal men,
     In all their drifts and counsels, pursue profit;
     Princes alone are of a different sort,
     Directing their main actions still to fame:
     We therefore will take time to think and answer.
     For Livia she can best, herself, resolve
     If she will marry, after Drusus, or
     Continue in the family; besides,
     She hath a mother, and a grandam yet,
     Whose nearer counsels she may guide her by:
     But I will simply deal. That enmity
     Thou fear'st in Agrippina, would burn more,
     If Livia's marriage should, as 'twere in parts,
     Divide the imperial house; an emulation
     Between the women might break forth; and discord
     Ruin the sons and nephews on both hands.
     What if it cause some present difference?
     Thou art not safe, Sejanus, if thou prove it.
     Canst thou believe, that Livia, first the wife
     To Caius Caesar, then my Drusus, now
     Will be contented to grow old with thee,
     Born but a private gentleman of Rome,
     And raise thee with her loss, if not her shame?
     Or say that I should wish it, canst thou think
     The senate, or the people (who have seen
     Her brother, father, and our ancestors,
     In highest place of empire) will endure it!
     The state thou hold'st already, is in talk;
     Men murmur at thy greatness; and the noble!
     Stick not, in public, to upbraid thy climbing
     Above our father's favours, or thy scale:
     And dare accuse me, from their hate to thee.
     Be wise, dear friend. We would not hide these things,
     For friendship's dear respect: Nor will we stand
     Adverse to thine, or Livia's designments.
     What we have purposed to thee, in our thought,
     And with what near degrees of love to bind thee,
     And make thee equal to us; for the present,
     We will forbear to speak. Only thus much
     Believe, our loved Sejanus, we not know
     That height in blood or honour, which thy virtue
     And mind to us, may not aspire with merit.
     And this we'll publish on all watch'd occasion
     The senate or the people shall present.

  Sej.
     I am restored, and to my sense again,
     Which I had lost in this so blinding suit.
     Caesar hath taught me better to refuse,
     Than I knew how to ask. How pleaseth Caesar
     T' embrace my late advice for leaving Rome!

  Tib. We are resolved.

  Sej.
     Here are some motives more,               [Gives him a paper
     Which I have thought on since, may more confirm.

  Tib.
     Careful Sejanus! we will straight peruse them:
     Go forward in our main design, and prosper.            [Exit.

  Sej.
     If those but take, I shall. Dull, heavy Caesar!
     Wouldst thou tell me, thy favours were made crimes,
     And that my fortunes were esteem'd thy faults,
     That thou for me wert hated, and not think
     I would with winged haste prevent that change,
     When thou might'st win all to thyself again,
     By forfeiture of me! Did those fond words
     Fly swifter from thy lips, than this my brain,
     This sparkling forge, created me an armour
     T' encounter chance and thee? Well, read my charms,
     And may they lay that hold upon thy senses,
     As thou hadst snuft up hemlock, or ta'en down
     The juice of poppy and of mandrakes. Sleep,
     Voluptuous Caesar, and security
     Seize on 'thy stupid powers, and leave them dead
     To public cares; awake but to thy lusts,
     The strength of which makes thy libidinous soul
     Itch to leave Rome! and I have thrust it on;
     With blaming of the city business,
     The multitude of suits, the confluence
     Of suitors; then their importunacies,
     The manifold distractions he must suffer,
     Besides ill-rumours, envies, and reproaches,
     All which a quiet and retired life,
     Larded with ease and pleasure, did avoid:
     And yet for any weighty and great affair,
     The fittest place to give the soundest counsels.
     By this I shall remove him both from thought
     And knowledge of his own most dear affairs;
     Draw all dispatches through my private hands;
     Know his designments, and pursue mine own;
     Make mine own strengths by giving suits and places.
     Conferring dignities and offices;
     And these that hate me now, wanting access
     To him, will make their envy none, or less:
     For when they see me arbiter of all,
     They must observe; or else, with Caesar fall.         [Exit




                 SCENE III.-Another Room in the same.
                         Enter TIBEBIUS.

  Tib.
     To marry Livia! will no less, Sejanus,
     Content thy aim? no lower object? well!
     Thou know'st how thou art wrought into our trust;
     Woven in our design; and think'st we must
     Now use thee, whatsoe'er thy projects are:
     'Tis true. But yet with caution and fit care.
     And, now we better think----who's there within?
                                                Enter an Officer.
  Off. Caesar!

  Tib.
     To leave our journey off, were sin
     'Gainst our decreed delights; and would appear
     Doubt; or, what less becomes a prince, low fear.
     Yet doubt hath law, and fears have their excuse.
     Where princes' states plead necessary use;
     As ours doth now: more in Sejanus' pride,
     Than all fell Agrippina's hates beside.
     Those are the dreadful enemies we raise
     With favours, and make dangerous with praise;
     The injured by us may have will alike,
     But 'tis the favourite hath the power to strike;
     And fury ever boils more high and strong,
     Heat with ambition, than revenge of wrong.
     'Tis then a part of supreme skill, to grace
     No man too much; but hold a certain space
     Between the ascender's rise, and thine own flat,
     Lest, when all rounds be reach'd, his aim be that.
     'Tis thought.                                       [Aside.]
     Is Macro in the palace? see:
     If not, go seek him, to come to us.----         [Exit Offi.]
     He must be the organ we must work by now;
     Though none less apt for trust: need doth allow
     What choice would not. I have heard that aconite,
     Being timely taken, hath a healing might
     Against the scorpion's stroke: the proof we'll give:
     That, while two poisons wrestle, we may live.
     He hath a spirit too working to be used
     But to the encounter of his like; excused
     Are wiser sov'reigns then, that raise one ill
     Against another, and both safely kill:
     The prince that feeds great natures, they will slay him;
     Who nourisheth a lion must obey him.----
                                     Be-enter Officer, with MACRO.
     Macro, we sent for you.

  Mac. I heard so, Caesar.

  Tib.
     Leave us awhile.----                   [Exit Officer.]
     When you shall know. good Macro,
     The causes of our sending, and the ends,
     You will then hearken nearer; and be pleas'd
     You stand so high both in our choice and trust.

  Mac.
     The humblest place in Caesar's choice or trust,
     May make glad Macro proud; without ambition.
     Save to do Caesar service.

  Tib.
     Leave your courtings.
     We are in purpose, Macro, to depart
     The city for a time, and see Campania;
     Not for our pleasures, but to dedicate
     A pair of temples, one to Jupiter
     At Capua; th' other at Nola, to Augustus:
     In which great work, perhaps our stay will be
     Beyond our will produced...Now since we are
     Not ignorant what danger may be born
     Out of our shortest absence in a state
     So subject unto envy, and embroil'd
     With hate and faction; we have thought on thee,
     Amongst a field of Romans, worthiest Macro,
     To be our eye and ear: to keep strict watch
     On Agrippina, Nero, Drusus; ay,
     And on Sejanus: not that we distrust
     His loyalty, or do repent one grace
     Of all that heap we have conferred on him;
     For that were to disparage our election,
     And call that judgment now in doubt, which then
     Seem'd as unquestion'd as an oracle-
     But, greatness hath his cankers. Worms and moths
     Breed out of too much humour, in the things
     Which after they consume, transferring quite
     The substance of their makers into themselves.
     Macro is sharp, and apprehends: besides,
     I know him subtle, close, wise, and well-read
     In man, and his large nature; he hath studied
     Affections, passions, knows their springs, their ends,
     Which way, and whether they will work: 'tis proof
     Enough of his great merit, that we trust him.
     Then to a point, because our conference
     Cannot be long without suspicion----
     Here, Macro, we assign thee, both to spy,
     Inform, and chastise; think, and use thy means,
     Thy ministers, what, where, on whom thou wilt;
     Explore, plot, practise: all thou dost in this
     Shall be, as if the Senate, or the laws
     Had given it privilege, and thou thence styled
     The saviour both of Caesar and of Rome.
     We will not take thy answer but in act:
     Whereto, as thou proceed'st, we hope to hear
     By trusted messengers. If't be inquired,
     Wherefore we call'd you, say you have in charge
     To see our chariots ready, and our horse.----
     Be still our loved and, shortly, honour'd Macro.

  Mac.
     I will not ask, why Caesar bids do this;
     But joy that he bids me. It is the bliss
     Of courts to be employ'd, no matter how;
     A prince's power makes all his actions virtue.
     We, whom he works by, are dumb instruments,
     To do, but not inquire: his great intents
     Are to be served, not search'd. Yet, as that bow
     Is most in hand, whose owner best doth know
     To affect his aims; so let that statesman hope
     Most use, most price, can hit his prince's scope.
     Nor must he look at what, or whom to strike,
     But loose at all; each mark must be alike.
     Were it to plot against the fame, the life
     Of one, with whom I twinn'd; remove a wife
     From my warm side, as loved as is the air;
     Practise sway each parent; draw mine heir
     In compass, though but one; work all my kin
     To swift perdition; leave no untrain'd engine,
     For friendship, or for innocence; nay, make
     The gods all guilty; I would undertake
     This, being imposed me, both with gain and ease:
     The way to rise is to obey and please.
     He that will thrive in state, he must neglect
     The trodden paths that truth and right respect;
     And prove new, wilder ways: for virtue there
     Is not that narrow thing, she is elsewhere;
     Men's fortune there is virtue; reason their will;
     Their license, law; and their observance, skill.
     Occasion is their foil; conscience, their stain;
     Profit their lustre; and what else is, vain.
     If then it be the lust of Caesar's power,
     To have raised Sejanus up, and in an hour
     O'erturn him, tumbling down, from height of all;
     We are his ready engine: and his fall
     May be our rise. It is no uncouth thing
     To see fresh buildings from old ruins spring.        [Exit.





ACT IV

           SCENE I.-An Apartment in AGRIPPINA'S House.
                  Enter GALLUS and AGRIPPINA.

  Gal. You must have patience, royal Agrippina.

  Agr.
     I must have vengeance, first; and that were nectar
     Unto my famish'd spirits. O, my fortune,
     Let it be sudden thou prepar'st against me;
     Strike all my powers of understanding blind.
     And ignorant of destiny to come!
     Let me not fear that cannot hope.

  Gal.
     Dear princess,
     These tyrannies on yourself, are worse than Caesar's.

  Agr.
     Is this the happiness of being born great?
     Still to be aim'd at? still to be suspected?
     To live the subject of all jealousies?
     At least the colour made, if not the ground
     To every painted danger? who would not
     Choose once to fall, than thus to hang for ever?

  Gal. You might be safe if you would----

  Agr.
     What, my Gallus!
     Be lewd Sejanus' strumpet, or the bawd
     To Caesar's lusts, he now is gone to practise?
     Not these are safe, where nothing is. Yourself,
     While thus you stand but by me, are not safe.
     Was Silius safe? or the good Sosia safe?
     Or was my niece, dear Claudia Pulchra, safe,
     Or innocent Furnius? they that latest have
     (By being made guilty) added reputation
     To Afer's eloquence? O, foolish friends,
     Could not so fresh example warn your loves,
     But you must buy my favours with that loss
     Unto yourselves; and when you might perceive
     That Caesar's cause of raging must forsake him,
     Before his will! Away, good Gallus, leave me.
     Here to be seen, is danger; to speak, treason:
     To do me least observance, is call'd faction.
     You are unhappy in me, and I in all.
     Where are my sons, Nero and Drusus?     We
     Are they be shot at; let us fall apart;
     Not in our ruins, sepulchre our friends.
     Or shall we do some action like offence,
     To mock their studies that would make us faulty,
     And frustrate practice by preventing it?
     The danger's like: for what they can contrive,
     They will make good. No innocence is safe,
     When power contests: nor can they trespass more,
     Whose only being was all crime before.

                                 Enter NERO, DRUSUS, and CALIGULA.

  Ner. You hear Sejanus is come back from Caesar?

  Gal. No. How? disgraced?

  Dru. More graced now than ever.

  Cal. By what mischance?

  Cal.
     A fortune like enough
     Once to be bad.

  Dru. But turn'd too good to both.

  Gal. What was't?

  Ner.
     Tiberius sitting at his meat,
     In a farm-house they call Spelunca, sited
     By the sea-side, among the Fundane hills,
     Within a natural cave; part of the grot,
     About the entry, fen, and overwhelm'd
     Some of the waiters; others ran away:
     Only Sejanus with his knees, hands, face,
     O'erhanging Caesar, did oppose himself
     To the remaining ruins, and was found
     In that so labouring posture by the soldiers
     That came to succour him. With which adventure,
     He hath so fix'd himself in Caesar's trust,
     As thunder cannot move him, and is come
     With all the height of Caesar's praise to Rome.

  Agr.
     And power, to turn those ruins all on us;
     And bury whole posterities beneath them.
     Nero, and Drusus, and Caligula,
     Your places are the next, and therefore most
     In their offence. Think on your birth and blood.
     Awake your spirits, meet their violence;
     'Tis princely when a tyrant doth oppose,
     And is a fortune sent to exercise
     Your virtue, as the wind doth try strong trees,
     Who by vexation grow more sound and firm.
     After your father's fall, and uncle's fate,
     What can you hope, but all the change of stroke
     That force or sleight can give? then stand upright;
     And though you do not act, yet suffer nobly:
     Be worthy of my womb, and take strong chear;
     What we do know will come, we should not fear.       [Exeunt.



                     SCENE ll.----The Street

                         Enter MACRO.

  Mac.
     Return'd so soon! renew'd in trust and grace!
     Is Caesar then so weak, or hath the place
     But wrought this alteration with the air;
     And he, on next remove, will all repair?
     Macro, thou art engaged: and what before
     Was public; now, must be thy private, more.
     The weal of Caesar, fitness did imply;
     But thine own fate confers necessity
     On thy employment; and the thoughts born nearest
     Unto ourselves, move swiftest still, and dearest.
     If he recover, thou art lost; yea, all
     The weight of preparation to his fall
     Will turn on thee, and crush thee: therefore strike
     Before he settle, to prevent the like
     Upon thyself. He doth his vantage know,
     That makes it home, and gives the foremost blow.       [Exit.



              SCENE Ill.-An upper Room of AGRIPPINA'S HOUSE.

                    Enter LATIARIS, RUFUS, and OPSIUS

  Lat.
     It is a service lord Sejanus will
     See well requited, and accept of nobly.
     Here place yourself between the roof and ceiling;
     And when I bring him to his words of danger,
     Reveal yourselves, and take him.

  Ruf. Is he come?

  Lat. I'll now go fetch him.

  Ops.
     With good speed.-I long
     To merit from the state in such an action.

  Ruf.
     I hope, it will obtain the consulship
     For one of us...

  Ops.
     We cannot think of less,
     To bring in one so dangerous as Sabinus.

  Ruf.
     He was follower of Germanicus,
     And still is an observer of his wife
     And children, though they be declined in grace
     A daily visitant, keeps them company
     In private and in public, and is noted
     To be the only client of the house:
     Pray Jove. he will be free to Latiaris.

  Ops.
     He's allied to him, and doth trust him well.
     Ruf: And he'll requite his trust!

  Ops.
     To do an office
     So grateful to the state, I know no man
     But would strain nearer bands, than kindred----

  Ruf.
     List!
     I hear them come.

  Ops. Shift to our holes with silence.               [They retire

                                     Re-enter LATIARIS and SABINUS.
  Lat.
     It is a noble constancy you shew
     To this afflicted house; that not like others,
     The friends of season, you do follow fortune,
     And, in the winter of their fate, forsake
     The place whose glories warm'd you. You are just,
     And worthy such a princely patron's love,
     As was the world's renown'd Germanicus:
     Whose ample merit when I call to thought,
     And see his wife and issue, objects made
     To so much envy, jealousy, and hate;
     It makes me ready to accuse the gods
     Of negligence, as men of tyranny.

  Sab. They must be patient, so must we.

  Lat.
     O Jove,
     What will become of us or of the times,
     When, to be high or noble, are made crimes,
     When land and treasure are most dangerous faults!

  Sab.
     Nay, when our table, yea our bed, assaults
     Our peace and safety? when our writings are,
     By any envious instruments, that dare
     Apply them to the guilty, made to speak
     What they will have to fit their tyrannous wreak?
     When ignorance is scarcely innocence;
     And knowledge made a capital offence!
     When not so much, but the bare empty shade
     Of liberty is raft us; and we made
     The prey to greedy vultures and vile spies,
     That first transfix us with their murdering eyes.

  Lat.
     Methinks the genius of the Roman race
     Should not be so extinct, but that bright flame
     Of liberty might be revived again,
     (Which no good man but. with his life should lose)
     And we not sit like spent and patient fools,
     Still puffing in the dark at one poor coal,
     Held on by hope till the last spark is out.
     The cause is public, and the honour, name,
     The immortality of every soul,
     That is not bastard or a slave in Rome,
     Therein concern'd: whereto, if men would change
     The wearied arm, and for the weighty shield
     So long sustain'd, employ the facile sword,
     We might soon have assurance of our vows.
     This ass's fortitude doth tire us all:
     It must be active valour must redeem
     Our loss, or none. The rock and 'our hard steel
     Should meet to enforce those glorious fires again,
     Whose splendour cheer'd the world, and heat gave life,
     No less than doth the sun's. Sab. 'Twere better stay
     In lasting darkness, and despair of day.
     No ill should force the subject undertake
     Against the sovereign, more than hell should make
     The gods do wrong. A good man should and must
     Sit rather down with loss, than rise unjust.
     Though, when the Romans first did yield themselves
     To one man's power, they did not mean their lives,
     Their fortunes and their liberties, should be
     His absolute spoil, as purchased by the sword.

  Lat.
     Why we are worse, if to be slaves, and bond
     To Caesar's slave be such, the proud Sejanus!
     He that is all, does all, gives Caesar leave
     To hide his ulcerous and anointed face,
     With his bald crown at Rhodes, while he here stalks
     Upon the heads of Romans, and their princes,
     Familiarly to empire.

  Sab.
     Now you touch
     A point indeed, wherein he shews his art,
     As well as power.

  Lat.
     And villainy in both.
     Do you observe where Livia lodges? how
     Drusus came dead? what men have been cut off?

  Sab.
     Yes, those are things removed: I nearer look'd
     Into his later practice, where he stands
     Declared a master in his mystery.
     First, ere Tiberius went, he wrought his fear
     To think that Agrippina sought his death.
     Then put those doubts in her; sent her oft word.
     Under the show of friendship, to beware
     Of Caesar, for he laid to poison her:
     Drave them to frowns, to mutual jealousies,
     Which, now, in visible hatred are burst out.
     Since, he hath had his hired instruments
     To work on Nero, and to heave him up;
     To tell him Caesar's old, that all the people,
     Yea, all the army have their eyes on him;
     That both do long to have him undertake
     Something of worth, to give the world a hope;
     Bids him to court their grace: the easy youth
     Perhaps gives ear, which straight he writes to Caesar;
     And with this comment: See yon dangerous boy;
     Note but the practice of the mother, there;
     She's tying him for purposes at hand,
     With men of sword. Here's Caesar put in fright
     'Gainst son and mother. Yet, he leaves not thus.
     The second brother, Drusus, a fierce nature,
     And fitter for his snares, because ambitious
     And full of envy, him he clasps and hugs,
     Poisons with praise, tells him what hearts he wears,
     How bright he stands in popular expectance;
     That Rome doth suffer with him in the wrong
     His mother does him, by preferring Nero:
     Thus sets he them asunder, each 'gainst other,
     Projects the course that serves him to condemn,
     Keeps in opinion of a friend to all,
     And all drives on to ruin.

  Lat. Caesar sleeps, And nods at this.

  Sab.
     Would he might ever sleep,
     Bogg'd in his filthy lusts!         [Opsius and Rufus rush in.

  Ops. Treason to Caesar!

  Ruf.
     Lay hands upon the traitor, Latiaris,
     Or take the name thyself.

  Lat. I am for Caesar.

  Sab. Am I then catch'd?

  Ruf. How think you, sir? you are.

  Sab.
     Spies of this head, so white, so full of years!
     Well, my most reverend monsters, you may live
     To see yourselves thus snared.

  Ops, Away with him!

  Lat. Hale him away.

  Ruf.
     To be a spy for traitors,
     Is honourable vigilance.

  Sab.
     You do well,
     My most officious instruments of state;
     Men of all uses: drag me hence, away.
     The year is well begun, and I fall fit
     To be an offering to Sejanus. Go!

  Ops. Cover him with his garments, hide his face.

  Sab.
     It shall not need. Forbear your rude assault.
     The fault's not shameful, villainy makes a fault.    [Exeunt.




          SCENE IV.----The Street before AGRIPPINA.'S House.

                  Enter MACRO and CALIGULA.

  Mac.
     Sir, but observe how thick your dangers meet
     In his clear drifts! your mother and your brothers,
     Now cited to the senate; their friend Gallus,
     Feasted to-day by Caesar, since committed!
     Sabinus here we met, hurried to fetters:
     The senators all strook with fear and silence,
     Save those whose hopes depend not on good means,
     But force their private prey from public spoil.
     And you must know, if here you stay, your state
     Is sure to be the subject of his hate, As now the object.

  Gal. What would you advise me?

  Mac.
     To go for Capreae presently; and there
     Give up yourself entirely to your uncle.
     Tell Caesar (since your mother is accused
     To fly for succours to Augustus' statue,
     And to the army with your brethren) you
     Have rather chose to place your aids in him,
     Than live suspected; or in hourly fear
     To be thrust out, by bold Sejanus' plots:
     Which, you shall confidently urge to be
     Most full of peril to the state, and Caesar,
     As being laid to his peculiar ends,
     And not to be let run with common safety.
     All which, upon the second, I'll make plain,
     So both shall love and trust with Caesar gain.

  Gal. Away then, let's prepare us for our journey.        [Exeunt




                   SCENE V.-Another part of the Street.

                          Enter ARRUNTIUS.

  Arr.
     Still dost thou suffer, heaven! will no flame,
     No heat of sin, make thy just wrath to boil
     In thy distemper'd bosom, and o'erflow
     The pitchy blazes of impiety,
     Kindled beneath thy throne! Still canst thou sleep,
     Patient, while vice doth make an antick face
     At thy dread power, and blow dust and smoke
     Into thy nostrils! Jove! will nothing wake thee?
     Must vile Sejanus pull thee by the beard,
     Ere thou wilt open thy black-lidded eye,
     And look him dead? Well! snore on, dreaming gods,
     And let this last of that proud giant-race
     Heave mountain upon mountain, 'gainst your state----
     Be good unto me, Fortune and you powers,
     Whom I, expostulating, have profaned;
     I see what's equal with a prodigy,
     A great, a noble Roman, and an honest,
     Live an old man!----
                                                   Enter LEPIDUS.
                           O Marcus Lepidus,
     When is our turn to bleed? Thyself and I,
     Without our boast, are almost all the few
     Left to be honest in these impious times.

  Lep.
     What we are left to be, we will be, Lucius;
     Though tyranny did stare as wide as death,
     To fright us from it.

  Arr. 'T hath so on Sabinus.

  Lep.
     I saw him now drawn from the Gemonies,
     And, what increased the direness of the fact,
     His faithful dog, upbraiding all us Romans,
     Never forsook the corps, but, seeing it thrown
     Into the stream, leap'd in, and drown'd with it.

  Arr.
     O act, to be envied him of us men!
     We are the next the hook lays hold on, Marcus:
     What are thy arts, good patriot, teach them me,
     That have preserved thy hairs to this white dye,
     And kept so reverend and so dear a head
     Safe on his comely shoulders?

  Lep.
     Arts, Arruntius!
     None, but the plain and passive fortitude,
     To suffer and be silent; never stretch
     These arms against the torrent; live at home,
     With my own thoughts, and innocence about me,
     Not tempting the wolves' jaws: these are my arts.

  Arr.
     I would begin to study 'em, if I thought
     They would secure me. May I pray to Jove
     In secret and be safe? ay, or aloud,
     With open wishes, so I do not mention
     Tiberius or Sejanus? yes, I must,
     If I speak out. 'Tis hard that. May I think,
     And not be rack'd? What danger is't to dream,
     Talk in one's sleep, or cough? Who knows the law?
     May I shake my head without a comment? say
     It rains, or it holds up, and not be thrown
     Upon the Gemonies? These now are things,
     Whereon men's fortune, yea, their faith depends.
     Nothing hath privilege 'gainst the violent ear.
     No place, no day, no hour, we see, is free,
     Not our religious and most sacred times,
     From some one kind of cruelty: all matter
     Nay, all occasion pleaseth. Madmen's rage,
     The idleness of drunkards, women's nothing,
     Jester's simplicity, all, all is good
     That can be catcht at...Nor is now the event
     Of any person, or for any crime,
     To be expected; for 'tis always one:
     Death, with some little difference of place,
     Or time----What's this? Prince Nero, guarded!
                                 Enter LACO and NERO, with Guards.
  Lac.
     On, lictors, keep your way. My lords, forbear.
     On pain of Caesar's wrath, no man attempt
     Speech with the prisoner.

  Nero.
     Noble friends, be safe;
     To lose yourselves for words, were as vain hazard,
     As unto me small comfort: fare you well.
     Would all Rome's sufferings in my fate did dwell!

  Lac. Lictors, away.

  Lep. Where goes he, Laco?

  Lac.
     Sir,
     He's banish'd into Pontia  by the senate.

  Arr.
      Do I see, hear, and feel? May I trust sense,
      Or doth my phant'sie form it?
  Lep. Where's his brother?

  Lac. Drusus is prisoner in the palace.

  Arr. Ha!
     I smell it now: 'tis rank. Where's Agrippina?

  Lac. The princess is confined to Pandataria.

  Arr.
     Bolts, Vulcan; bolts for Jove! Phoebus, thy bow;
     Stern Mars, thy sword: and, blue-ey'd maid, thy spear;
     Thy club, Alcides: all the armoury
     Of heaven is too little!----Ha!----to guard
     The gods, I meant. Fine, rare dispatch I this same
     Was swiftly born! Confined, imprison'd, banish'd?
     Most tripartite! the cause, sir?

  Lac. Treason.

  Arr.
     O!
     The complement  of all accusings! that
     Will hit, when all else fails.

  Lep.
     This turn is strange!
     But yesterday the people would not hear,
     Far less objected, but cried Caesar's letters
     Were false and forged; that all these plots were malice;
     And that the ruin of the prince's house
     Was practised' gainst his knowledge. Where are now
     Their voices, now, that they behold his heirs
     Lock'd up, disgraced, led into exile?

  Arr.
     Hush'd,
     Drown'd in their bellies. Wild Sejanus' breath
     Hath, like a whirlwind, scatter'd that poor dust,
     With this rude blast----We'll talk no treason, sir,
                                       [Turns to Laco and the rest
     If that be it you stand for. Fare you well.
     We have no need of horse-leeches. Good spy,
     Now you are spied, be gone.
                                    [Exeunt Laco, Nero, and Guards.
  Lep.
     I fear you wrong him:
     He has the voice to be an honest Roman.

  Arr.
     And trusted to this office! Lepidus,
     I'd sooner trust Greek Sinon, than a man
     Our state employs. He's gone: and being gone,
     I dare tell you, whom I dare better trust,
     That our night-eyed Tiberius doth not see
     His minion's drifts; or, if he do, he's not
     So arrant subtile, as we fools do take him;
     To breed a mungrel up, in his own house,
     With his own blood, and, if the good gods please,
     At his own throat, flesh him, to take a leap.
     I do not beg it, heaven; but if the fates
     Grant it these eyes, they must not wink.

  Lep.
     They must
     Not see it, Lucius.

  Arr. Who should let them?

  Lep.
     Zeal,
     And duty: with the thought he is our prince.

  Arr.
     He is our monster: forfeited to vice
     So far, as no rack'd virtue can redeem him.
     His loathed person fouler than all crimes:
     An emperor, only in his lusts. Retired,
     From all regard of his own fame, or Rome's,
     Into an obscure island; where he lives
     Acting his tragedies with a comic face,
     Amidst his route of Chaldees:  spending hours,
     Days, weeks, and months, in the unkind abuse
     Of grave astrology, to the bane of men,
     Casting the scope of men's nativities,
     And having found aught worthy in their fortune,
     Kill, or precipitate them in the sea,
     And boast, he can mock fate. Nay, muse not: these
     Are far from ends of evil, scarce degrees.
     He hath his slaughter-house at Capreae;
     Where he doth study murder, as an art;
     And they are dearest in his grace, that can
     Devise the deepest tortures. Thither, too,
     He hath his boys, and beauteous girls ta'en up
     Out of our noblest houses, the best form'd,
     Best nurtured, and most modest; what's their good,
     Serves to provoke his bad. Some are allured,
     Some threaten'd; others, by their friends detained,
     Are ravish'd hence, like captives, and, in sight
     Of their most grieved parents, dealt away
     Unto his spintries, sellaries, and slaves,
     Masters of strange and new commented lusts,
     For which wise nature hath not left a name.
     To this (what most strikes us, and bleeding Rome)
     He is, with all his craft, become the ward
     To his own vassal, a stale catamite:
     Whom he, upon our low and suffering necks,
     Hath raised from excrement to side the gods,
     And have his proper sacrifice in Rome:
     Which Jove beholds, and yet will sooner rive
     A senseless oak with thunder than his trunk!----

                        Re-enter LACO with POMPONIUS and MINUTIUS.
  Lac.
     These letters make men doubtful what t' expect,
     Whether his coming, or his death.

  Pom.
     Troth, both:
     And which comes soonest, thank the gods for.

  Arr.
     List!
     Their talk is Caesar; I would hear all voices.

                               [Arrunt. and Lepidus stand aside
  Min.
     One day, he's well; and will return to Rome;
     The next day, sick; and knows not when to hope it.

  Lac.
     True; and to-day, one of Sejanus' friends
     Honour'd by special writ; and on the morrow
     Another punish'd----

  Pom. By more special writ.

  Min.
     This man receives his praises of Sejanus,
     A second but slight mention, a third none,
     A fourth rebukes: and thus he leaves the senate
     Divided and suspended, all uncertain.

  Lac.
     These forked tricks, I understand them not:
     Would he would tell us whom he loves or hates,
     That we might follow, without fear or doubt.

  Arr.
     Good Heliotrope! Is this your honest man?
     Let him be yours so still; he is my knave.

  Pom.
     I cannot tell, Sejanus still goes on,
     And mounts, we see;  new statues are advanced,
     Fresh leaves of titles, large inscriptions read,
     His fortune sworn by, himself new gone out
     Caesar's colleague in the fifth consulship;
     More altars smoke to him than all the gods:
     What would we more?

  Arr.
     That the dear smoke would choke him,
     That would I more.


  Lep. Peace, good Arruntius.

  Lat.
     But there are letters come, they say, ev'n now,
     Which do forbid that last.

  Min. Do you hear so?

  Lac. Yes.

  Pom. By Castor, that's the worst.

  Arr. By Pollux, best.

  Min.
     I did not like the sign, when Regulus,
     Whom all we know no friend unto Sejanus,
     Did, by Tiberius' so precise command,
     Succeed a fellow in the consulship:
     It boded somewhat.


  Pom.
     Not a mote. His partner,
     Fulcinius Trio, is his own, and sure.----
     Here comes Terentius.
                                                 Enter TERENTIUS.
     He can give us more.
                                     [They whisper with Terentius.
  Lep.
     I'll ne'er believe, but Caesar hath some scent
     Of bold Sejanus' footing. These cross points
     Of varying letters, and opposing consuls,
     Mingling his honours and his punishments,
     Feigning now ill, now well, raising Sejanus,
     And then depressing him, as now of late
     In all reports we have it, cannot be
     Empty of practice: 'tis Tiberius' art.
     For having found his favourite grown too great,
     And with his greatness strong; that all the soldiers
     Are, with their leaders, made a his devotion;
     That almost all the senate are his creatures,
     Or hold on him their main dependencies,
     Either for benefit, or hope, or fear;
     And that himself hath lost much of his own,
     By parting unto him; and, by th' increase
     Of his rank lusts and rages, quite disarm'd
     Himself of love, or other public means,
     To dare an open contestation;
     His subtilty hath chose this doubling line,
     To hold him even in: not so to fear him,
     As wholly put him out, and yet give check
     Unto his farther boldness. In mean time,
     By his employments, makes him odious
     Unto the staggering rout, whose aid, in fine,
     He hopes to use, as sure, who, when they sway.
     Bear down, o'erturn all objects in their way.

  Arr.
     You may be a Lynceus, Lepidus: yet I
     See no such cause, but that a politic tyrant,
     Who can so well disguise it, should have ta'en
     A nearer way: feign'd honest, and come home
     To cut his throat, by law.

  Lep.
     Ay, but his fear
     Would ne'er be mask'd, allbe his vices were.

  Pom. His lordship then is still in grace?

  Ter.
     Assure you,
     Never in more, either of grace or power.

  Pom. The gods are wise and just.

  Arr.
     The fiends they are,
     To suffer thee belie 'em.

  Ter.
     I have here
     His last and present letters, where he writes him,
     The partner of his cares, and his Sejanus.----

  Lac.
     But is that true? it is prohibited
     To sacrifice unto him?

  Ter.
     Some such thing
     Caesar makes scruple of, but forbids it not;
     No more than to himself: says he could wish
     It were forborn to all.

  Lac. Is it no other?

  Ter.
     No other, on my trust. For your more surety,
     Here is that letter too.

  Arr.
     How easily
     Do wretched men believe, what they would have!
     Looks this like plot?

  Lep. Noble Arruntius, stay.

  Lac. He names him here without his titles.

  Lep. Note!

  Arr. Yes, and come off your notable fool. I will

  Lac. No other than Sejanus.

  Pom.
     That's but haste
     In him that writes: here he gives large amends.

  Mar. And with his own hand written?

  Pom. Yes.

  Lac. Indeed?

  Ter.
     Believe it, gentlemen, Sejanus' breast
     Never received more full contentments in,
     Than at this present.

  Pom.
     Takes he well the escape
     Of young Caligula, with Macro?

  Ter.
     Faith,
     At the first air it somewhat troubled him.

  Lep. Observe you?

  Arr.
     Nothing; riddles. Till I see
     Sejanus struck, no sound thereof strikes me.

                                      [Exeunt Arrun. and Lepidus.
  Pom.
     I like it not. I muse he would not attempt
     Somewhat against him in the consulship,
     Seeing the people 'gin to favour him.

  Ter.
     He doth repent it now; but he has employ'd
     Pagonianus after him:  and he holds
     That correspondence there, with all that are
     Near about Caesar, as no thought can pass
     Without his knowledge, thence in act to front him.

  Pom. I gratulate the news.

  Lac.
     But how comes Macro
     So in trust and favour with Caligula?

  Pom.
     O, sir, he has a wife; and the young prince
     An appetite: he can look up, and spy
     Flies in the roof, when there are fleas i' the bed;
     And hath a learned nose to assure his sleeps.
     Who to be favour'd of the rising sun,
     Would not lend little of his waning moon?
     It is the saf'st ambition. Noble Terentius!

  Ter. The night grows fast upon us. At your service.     [Exeunt.





ACT V

              SCENE I.-An Apartment in SEJANUS' House.
                          Enter SEJANUS.

  Sej.
     Swell, swell, my joys; and faint not to declare
     Yourselves as ample as your causes are.
     I did not live till now; this my first hour;
     Wherein I see my thoughts reach'd by my power.
     But this, and gripe my wishes. Great and high,
     The world knows only two, that's Rome and I.
     My roof receives me not; 'tis air I tread;
     And, at each step, I feel my advanced head
     Knock out a star in heaven! rear'd to this height,
     All my desires seem modest, poor, and slight,
     That did before sound impudent: 'tis place,
     Not blood, discerns the noble and the base.
     Is there not something more than to be Caesar?
     Must we rest there'! it irks t' have come so far,
     To be so near a stay. Caligula,
     Would thou stood'st stiff, and many in our way!
     Winds lose their strength, when they do empty fly,
     Unmet of woods or buildings; great fires die,
     That want their matter to withstand them: so,
     It is our grief, and will be our loss, to know
     Our power shall want opposites; unless
     The gods, by mixing in the cause, would bless
     Our fortune with their conquest. That were worth
     Sejanus' strife; durst fates but bring it forth.
                                                 Enter TERENTIUS.

  Ter. Safety to great Sejanus!

  Sej. Now, Terentius?

  Ter. Hears not my lord the wonder?

  Sej. Speak it, no.

  Ter.
     I meet it violent in the people's mouths,
     Who run in routs to Pompey's theatre,
     To view your statue, which, they say, sends forth
     A smoke, as from a furnace, black and dreadful.

  Sej.
     Some traitor hath put fire in: you, go see,
     And let the head be taken oft', to look
     What 'tis. [Exit Terentius.]----
     Some slave hath practised an imposture,
     To stir the people.-How now! why return you?

                       Reenter TERENTIUS, with SATRIUS and NATTA.
  Sat.
     The head, my lord, already is ta'en off,
     I saw it; and, at opening, there leapt out
     A great and monstrous serpent.

  Sej.
     Monstrous! why?
     Had it a beard, and horns? no heart? a tongue
     Forked as flattery? look'd it of the hue,
     To such as live in great men's bosoms?  was
     The spirit of it Macro's?

  Nat.
     May it please
     The most divine Sejanus, in my days,
     (And by his sacred fortune, I affirm it,)
     I have not seen a more extended, grown,
     Foul, spotted, venomous, ugly----

  Sej.
     O, the fates!
     What a wild muster's here of attributes,
     T' express a worm, a snake!

  Ter.
     But how that should
     Come there, my lord!

  Sej.
     What, and you too, Terentius!
     I think you mean to make 't a prodigy
     In your reporting.

  Ter. Can the wise Sejanus
     Think heaven hath meant it less!

  Sej.
     O, superstition!
     Why, then the falling of our bed, that brake
     This morning, burden'd with the populous weight,
     Of our expecting clients, to salute us;
     Or running of the cat betwixt our legs,
     As we set forth unto the Capitol, Were prodigies.

  Ter.
     I think them ominous;
     And would they had not happened! As, to-day,
     The fate of some your servants: who, declining
     Their way, not able, for the throng, to follow,
     Slipt down the Gemonies, and brake their necks!
     Besides, in taking your last augury,
     No prosperous bird appear'd; but croaking ravens
     Flagg'd up and down, and from the sacrifice
     Flew to the prison, where they sat all night,
     Beating the air with their obstreperous beaks!
     I dare not counsel, but I could entreat,
     That great Sejanus would attempt the gods
     Once more with sacrifice.

  Sej.
     What excellent fools
     Religion makes of men! Believes Terentius,
     If these were dangers, as I shame to think them,
     The gods could change the certain course of fate!
     Or, if they could they would, now in a moment,
     For a beeve's fat, or less, be bribed to invert
     Those long decrees? Then think the gods, like flies,
     Are to be taken with the steam of flesh,
     Or blood, diffused about their altars: think
     Their power as cheap as I esteem it small.----
     Of all the throng that fill th' Olympian hall,
     And, without pity, lade poor Atlas' back,
     I know not that one deity, but Fortune,
     To whom I would throw up, in begging smoke,
     One grain of incense;  or whose ear I'd buy
     With thus much oil. Her I, indeed, adore;
     And keep her grateful image in my house,
     Sometime belonging to a Roman king.
     But now call'd mine, as by the better style:
     To her I care not, if, for satisfying
     Your scrupulous phant'sies, I go offer. Bid
     Our priest prepare us honey, milk, and poppy,
     His masculine odours, and night-vestments: say,
     Our rites are instant; which perform'd, you'll see
     How vain, and worthy laughter, your fears be.          [Exeunt




                  SCENE II.-Another Room in the same.
                    Enter COTTA and POMPONIUS.

  Cot. Pomponius, whither in such speed?

  Pom.
     I go
     To give my lord Sejanus notice----

  Cot. What?

  Pom. Of Macro.

  Cot. Is he come?

  Pom.
     Enter'd but now
     The house of Regulus

  Cot. The opposite consul!

  Pom. Some half hour since.

  Cot.
     And by night too! Stay, sir;
     I'll bear you company.

  Pom. Along then----                                        [Exeunt





                 SCENE III.-A Room in REGULUS'S House.
                 Enter MACRO, REGULUS, and Attendant.

  Mac.
     Tis Caesar's will to have a frequent senate;
     And therefore must your edict lay deep mulct
     On such as shall be absent.

  Reg.
     So it doth.
     Bear it my fellow consul to adscribe.

  Mac.
     And tell him it must early be proclaim'd:
     The place Apollo's temple.                    [Exit Attendant

  Reg. That's remember'd.

  Mac. And at what hour!

  Reg. Yes.

  Mac.
     You do forget
     To send one for the provost of the watch.

  Reg. I have not: here he comes.
                                                       Enter LACO.
  Mac.
     Gracinus Laco,
     You are a friend most welcome: by and by,
     I'll speak with you.----You must procure this list
     Of the praetorian cohorts, with the names
     Of the centurions, and their tribunes.

  Reg. Ay.

  Mac. I bring you letters, and a health from Caesar----

  Lac. Sir, both come well.

  Mac.
     And hear you? with your note,
     Which are the eminent men, and most of action.

  Reg. That shall be done you too.

  Mac.
     Most worthy Laco,
     Caesar salutes you.----                      [Exit Regulus.]
                            Consul! death and furies!
     Gone now!----The argument will please you, sir.
     Ho! Regulus! The anger of the gods
     Follow your diligent legs, and overtake 'em,
     In likeness of the gout!----
                                               [Re-enter REGULUS.
                                 O, my good lord,
     We lack'd you present; I would pray you send
     Another to Fulcinius Trio, straight,
     To tell him you will come, and speak with him:
     The matter we'll devise, to stay him there,
     While I with Laco do survey the watch.         [Exit Regulus.
     What are your strengths, Gracinus?

  Lac. Seven cohorts.

  Mac.
     You see what Caesar writes; and----Gone again!
     H' has sure a vein of mercury in his feet.----
     Know you what store of the praetorian soldiers
     Sejanus holds about him, for his guard?

  Lac.
     I cannot the just number; but, I think,
     Three centuries.

  Mac. Three! good.

  Lac. At most not four.

  Mac. And who be those centurions?

  Lac.
     That the consul
     Can best deliver you.

  Mac.
     When he's away!
     Spite on his nimble industry----Gracinus,
     You find what place you hold. there, in the trust
     Of royal Caesar?

  Lac. Ay, and I am----

  Mac.
     Sir,
     The honours there proposed are but beginnings
     Of his great favours.

  Lac. They are more----

  Mac.
     I heard him
     When he did study what to add.

  Lac.
     My life,
     And all I hold----

  Mac.
     You were his own first choice:
     Which doth confirm as much as you can speak;
     And will, if we succeed, make more----Your guards
     Are seven cohorts, you say?

  Lac. Yes.

  Mac.
     Those we must
     Hold still in readiness and undischarged.

  Lac. I understand so much. But how it can----

  Mac. Be done without suspicion, you'll object?
                                   Re-enter REGULUS.
  Reg. What's that?

  Lac.
     The keeping of the watch in arms,
     When morning comes.

  Mac.
     The senate shall be met, and set
     So early in the temple, as all mark
     Of that shall be avoided.

  Reg.
     If we need,
     We have commission to possess the palace,
     Enlarge prince Drusus, and make him our chief.

  Mac.
     That secret would have burnt his reverend mouth,
     Had he not spit it out now: by the gods,
     You carry things too----Let me borrow a man
     Or two, to bear these----That of freeing Drusus,
     Caesar projected as the last and utmost;
     Not else to be remember'd.
                            Enter Servants.
  Reg. Here are servants.

  Mac.
     These to Arruntius, these to Lepidus;
     This bear to Cotta, this to Latiaris.
     If they demand you of me, say I have ta'en
     Fresh horse, and am departed.               [Exeunt Servants.
                                   You, my lord,
     To your colleague, and be you sure to hold him
     With long narration of the new fresh favours,
     Meant to Sejanus, his great patron; I,
     With trusted Laco, here, are for the guards:
     Then to divide. For, night hath many eyes,
     Whereof, though most do sleep, yet some are spies.   [Exeunt



           SCENE IV.-A Sacellum (or Chapel) in SEJANUS'S House.
         Enter Praecones, Flamen, Tubicines, Tibicines, Ministri,
                SEJANUS, TERENTIUS, SATRIUS, NATTA, etc.

  Prae.
     Be all profane far hence;  fly, fly far off:
     Be absent far; far hence be all profane!
                      [Tub. and Tib. sound while the Flamen washeth.
  Fla.
     We have been faulty, but repent us now,
     And bring pure hands, pure vestments, and pure minds.

  1 Min. Pure vessels.

  2 Min. And pure offerings.

  3 Min. Garlands pure.

  Fla.
     Bestow your garlands: and, with reverence, place
     The vervin on the altar.

  Prae. Favour your tongues.


  [While they sound again, the Flamen takes of the honey with his
  finger, and tastes, then ministers to all the rest; so of the milk,
  in an earthen vessel, he deals about; which done, he sprinkleth
  upon the altar, milk; then imposeth the honey, and kindleth his
  gums, and after censing about the altar, placeth his censer
  thereon, into which they put several branches of poppy, and the
  music ceasing, proceeds.

  Fla.
     Great mother Fortune, queen of human state,
     Redress of action, arbitress of fate,
     To whom all sway, all power, all empire bows,
     Be present; and propitious to our vows!

  Prae. Favour it with your tongues.

  Min. Be present and propitious to our vows!

  Omnes. Accept our offering  and be pleased, great goddess.

  Ter. See, see, the image stirs!

  Sat. And turns away!

  Nat. Fortune averts her face.

  Fla.
     Avert, you gods,
     The prodigy. Still! still, some pious rite
     We have neglected. Yet, heaven be appeased,
     And be all tokens false and void, that speak
     Thy present wrath!

  Sej.
     Be thou dumb, scrupulous priest:
     And gather up thyself, with these thy wares
     Which I, in spite of thy blind mistress, or
     Thy juggling mystery, religion, throw
     Thus scorned on the earth.
                              [Overturns the statue and the altar.

                              Nay, hold thy look
     Averted till I woo thee turn again
     And thou shalt stand to all posterity,
     The eternal game and laughter, with thy neck
     Writh'd to thy tail, like a ridiculous cat.
     Avoid these fumes, these superstitious lights,
     And all these cozening ceremonies: you,
     Your pure and spiced conscience!
           [Exeunt all but Sejanus, Terent., Satri., and Natta.

                                      I, the slave
     And mock of fools, scorn on my worthy head!
     That have been titled and adored a god,
     Yea, sacrificed unto, myself, in Rome,
     No less than Jove: and I be brought to do
     A peevish giglot, rites! perhaps the thought
     And shame of that, made fortune turn her face,
     Knowing herself the lesser deity,
     And but my servant.-Bashful queen, if so,
     Sejanus thanks thy modesty.----Who's that?
                                  Enter POMPONIUS and MINUTIUS.

  Pom.
     His fortune suffers, till he hears my news:
     I have waited here too long. Macro, my lord----

  Sej. Speak lower and withdraw.                 [Takes him aside.

  Ter. Are these things true?

  Min. Thousands are gazing at it in the streets.

  Sej. What's that?

  Ter.
     Minutius tells us here, my lord,
     That a new head being set upon your statue,
     A rope is since found wreath'd about it! and,
     But now a fiery meteor in the form
     Of a great ball was seen to roll along
     The troubled air, where yet it hangs unperfect,
     The amazing wonder of the multitude!

  Sej. No more. That Macro's come, is more than all!

  Ter. Is Macro come?

  Pom. I saw him.

  Ter. Where? with whom?

  Pom. With Regulus.

  Sej. Terentius!

  Per. My lord.

  Sej.
     Send for the tribunes, we will straight have up
     More of the soldiers for our guard. [Exit Per.] Minutius,
     We pray you go for Cotta, Latiaris,
     Trio, the consul, or what senators
     You know are sure, and ours. [Exit Min.] You, my good Natta,
     For Laco, provost of the watch. [Exit Nat.] Now, Satrius,
     The time of proof comes on; arm all our servants,
     And without tumult. [Exit Sat.] You, Pomponius,
     Hold some good correspondence with the consul:
     Attempt him, noble friend. [Exit Pomp.] These things begin
     To look like dangers, now, worthy my fates.
     Fortune, I see thy worst: let doubtful states,
     And things uncertain, hang upon thy will:
     Me surest death shall render certain still.
     Yet, why is now my thought turn'd toward death,
     Whom fates have let go on, so far in breath,
     Uncheck'd or unreproved? I that did help
     To fell the lofty cedar of the world,
     Germanicus; that at one stroke cut down
     Drusus, that upright elm; wither'd his vine;
     Laid Silius and Sabinus, two strong oaks,
     Flat on the earth; besides those other shrubs,
     Cordus and Sosia, Claudia Pulchra,
     Furnius and Gallus, which I have grubb'd up;
     And since, have set my axe so strong and deep
     Into the root of spreading Agrippina;
     Lopt off and scatter'd her proud branches,
     Nero. Drusus; and Caius  too, although re-planted.
     If you will, Destinies, that after all,
     I faint now ere I touch my period,
     You are but cruel; and I already have done
     Things great enough. All Rome hath been my slave;
     The senate sate an idle looker on,
     And witness of my power; when I have blush'd
     More to command than it to suffer: all
     The fathers have sate ready and prepared.
     To give me empire, temples, or their throats.
     When I would ask 'em; and what crowns the top,
     Rome, senate, people, all the world have seen
     Jove, but my equal; Caesar, but my second.
     'Tis then your malice, Fates, who, but your own,
     Envy and fear to have any power long known.



                   SCENE V.----A Room in the same.

                   Enter TERENTIUS and Tribunes.

  Ter. Stay here: I'll give his lordship, you are come.
                          Enter MINUTIUS, with COTTA and LATIARIS.
  Min.
     Marcus Terentius, 'pray you tell my lord
     Here's Cotta, and Latiaris.

  Ter. Sir, I shall.

  Cot.
     My letter is the very same with yours;
     Only requires me to be present there,
     And give my voice to strengthen his design.

  Lat. Names he not what it is?

  Cot. No, nor to you.

  Lat. 'Tis strange and singular doubtful!

  Cot.
     So it is.
     It may be all is left to lord Sejanus.
                                   Enter NATTA and GRACINUS LACO.

  Nat. Gentlemen, where's my lord?

  Tri. We wait him here.

  Cot. The provost Laco! what's the news?

  Lat. My lord----

                              Enter SEJANUS.

  Sej.
     Now, my right dear, noble, and trusted friends,
     How much I am a captive to your kindness!
     Most worthy Cotta, Latiaris, Laco,
     Your valiant hand; and, gentlemen, your loves.
     I wish I could divide myself unto you;
     Or that it lay within our narrow powers,
     To satisfy for so enlarged bounty.
     Gracinus, we must pray you, hold your guards
     Unquit when morning comes. Saw you the consul?

  Min. Trio will presently be here, my lord.

  Cot.
     They are but giving order for the edict,
     To warn the senate.

  Sej. How! the senate?

  Lac.
     Yes.
     This morning in Apollo's temple.

  Cot.
     We
     Are charged by letter to be there, my lord.

  Sej. By letter! pray you, let's see.

  Lat. Knows not his lordship?

  Cot. It seems so!

  Sej.
     A senate warn'd! Without my knowledge!
     And on this sudden! Senators by letters
     Required to be there! who brought these?

  Cot. Macro.

  Sej. Mine enemy! and when?

  Cot. This midnight.

  Sej.
     Time,
     With every other circumstance, doth give
     It hath some strain of engine in't!----How now?
                                                   Enter SATRIUS.
  Sat.
     My lord, Sertorius Macro is without,
     Alone, and prays t' have private conference
     In business of high nature with your lordship,
     He says to me, and which regards you much.

  Sej. Let him come here.

  Sat.
     Better, my lord, Withdraw:
     You will betray what store and strength of friends
     Are now about you; which he comes to spy.

  Sej. Is he not arm'd?

  Sat. We'll search him.

  Sej.
     No; but take,
     And lead him to some room, where you conceal'd
     May keep a guard upon us.                        [Exit Sat.]
                                Noble Laco,
     You are our trust; and till our own cohorts
     Can be brought up, your strengths must be our guard.
     Now, good Minutius, honour'd Latiaris,
                                            [He salutes them humbly.
     Most worthy and my most unwearied friends:
     I return instantly.                                  [Exit.

  Lat. Most worthy lord.

  Cot.
     His lordship is turn'd instant kind, methinks;
     I have not observed it in him, heretofore.

  1 Tri. 'Tis true, and it becomes him nobly.

  Min.
     I
     Am wrapt withal.

  2 Tri.
     By Mars, he has my lives,
     Were they a million, for this only grace.

  Lac. Ay, and to name a man!

  Lat. As he did me!

  Min. And me!

  Lat.
     Who would not spend his life and fortunes,
     To purchase but the look of such a lord?


  Lac.
     He that would nor be lord's fool, nor the world's.    [Aside.




                   SCENE VI.-Another Room in the same.
                    Enter SEJANUS, MACRO, and SATRIUS.

  Sej.
     Macro! most welcome, a most coveted friend!
     Let me enjoy my longings. When arrived you?

  Mac. About the noon of night.

  Sej. Satrius, give leave.                            [Exit Sat.

  Mac.
     I have been, since I came, with both the consuls,
     On a particular design from Caesar.

  Sej. How fares it with our great and royal master?

  Mac.
     Right plentifully well; as, with a prince,
     That still holds out the great proportion
     Of his large favours, where his judgment hath
     Made once divine election: like the god
     That wants not, nor is wearied to bestow
     Where merit meets his bounty, as it doth
     In you, already the most happy, and ere
     The sun shall climb the south, most high Sejanus.
     Let not my lord be amused. For, to this end
     Was I by Caesar sent for to the isle,
     With special caution to conceal my journey;
     And, thence, had my dispatch as privately
     Again to Rome; charged to come here by night;
     And only to the consuls make narration
     Of his great purpose; that the benefit
     Might come more full, and striking, by how much
     It was less look'd for, or aspired by you,
     Or least informed to the common thought.

  Sej.
     What may be this? part of myself, dear Macro,
     If good, speak out; and share with your Sejanus.

  Mac.
     If bad, I should for ever loath myself
     To be the messenger to so good a lord.
     I do exceed my instructions to acquaint
     Your lordship with thus much; but 'tis my venture
     On your retentive wisdom: and because
     I would no jealous scruple should molest
     Or rack your peace of thought. For I assure
     My noble lord, no senator yet knows
     The business meant: though all by several letters
     Are warned to be there, and give their voices,
     Only to add unto the state and grace
     Of what is purposed.

  Sej.
     You take pleasure, Macro,
     Like a coy wench, in torturing your lover.
     What can be worth this suffering?

  Mac.
     That which follows,
     The tribunitial dignity and power:
     Both which Sejanus is to have this day
     Conferr'd upon him, and by public senate.

  Sej.
     Fortune be mine again! thou hast satisfied
     For thy suspected loyalty.                            [Aside.

  Mac.
     My lord,
     I have no longer time, the day approacheth,
     And I must back to Caesar.

  Sej. Where's Caligula?

  Mac.
     That I forgot to tell your lordship. Why,
     He lingers yonder about Capreae,
     Disgraced; Tiberius hath not seen him yet:
     He needs would thrust himself to go with me,
     Against my wish or will; but I have quitted
     His forward trouble, with as tardy note
     As my neglect or silence could afford him.
     Your lordship cannot now command me aught,
     Because I take no knowledge that I saw you;
     But I shall boast to live to serve your lordship:
     And so take leave.

  Sej.
     Honest and worthy Macro;
     Your love and friendship.                      [Exit Macro.]
                                 ----Who's there? Satrius,
     Attend my honourable friend forth.-O!
     How vain and vile a passion is this fear,
     What base uncomely things it makes men do!
     Suspect their noblest friends, as I did this,
     Flatter poor enemies, entreat their servants,
     Stoop, court, and catch at the benevolence
     Of creatures, unto whom, within this hour,
     I would not have vouchsafed a quarter-look,
     Or piece of face! By you that fools call gods,
     Hang all the sky with your prodigious signs,
     Fill earth with monsters, drop the scorpion down,
     Out of the zodiac, or the fiercer lion,
     Shake off the loosen'd globe from her long hinge,
     Roll all the world in darkness, and let loose
     The enraged winds to turn up groves and towns!
     When I do fear again, let me be struck
     With forked fire, and unpitied die:
     Who fears, is worthy of calamity.                      [Exit.



                     SCENE VIl.-Another Room in the same.

            Enter TERENTIUS, MINUTIUS, LACO, COTTA, LATIARIS,
       and POMPONIUS; REGULUS, TRIO, and others, on different sides.

  Pom. Is not my lord here?

  Ter. Sir, he will be straight.

  Cot. What news, Fulcinius Trio?

  Tri.
     Good, good tidings;
     But keep it to yourself. My lord Sejanus
     Is to receive this day in open senate
     The tribunitial dignity.

  Cot. Is't true?

  Tri. No words, not to your thought: but, sir, believe it.

  Lat. What says the consul?

  Cot.
     Speak it not again:
     He tells me, that to-day my lord Sejanus----

  Tri.
     I must entreat you, Cotta, on your honour
     Not to reveal it.

  Cot. On my life, sir.

  Lat. Say.

  Cot.
     Is to receive the tribunitial power.
     But, as you are an honourable man,
     Let me conjure you not to utter it;
     For it is trusted to me with that bond.

  Lat. I am Harpocrates.

  Ter. Can you assure it?

  Pom. The consul told it me, but keep it close.

  Min. Lord Latiaris, what's the news?

  Lat.
     I'll tell you;
     But you must swear to keep it secret.
                                                    Enter SEJANUS.
  Sej.
     I knew the Fates had on their distaff left
     More of our thread, than so.

  Reg. Hail, great Sejanus!

  Tri. Hail, the most honour'd!

  Cot. Happy!

  Lat. High Sejanus!

  Sej. Do you bring prodigies too?

  Tri.
     May all presage
     Turn to those fair effects, whereof we bring
     Your lordship news.

  Reg. May't please my lord withdraw.

  Sej. Yes:-I will speak with you anon.     [To some that stand by.

  Ter.
     My lord,
     What is your pleasure for the tribunes?

  Sej.
     Why,
     Let them be thank'd and sent away.

  Min. My lord----

  Lac. Will't please your lordship to command me-

  Sej.
     No:
     You are troublesome.

  Min. The mood is changed.

  Tri.
     Not speak,
     Nor look!

  Lac.
     Ay, he is wise, will make him friends
     Of such who never love, but for their ends.           [Exeunt.




               SCENE VIII.-A Space before the Temple of Apollo.
         Enter ARRUNTIUS and LEPIDUS divers Senators passing by them.


  Arr.
     Ay, go, make haste; take heed you be not last
     To tender your All Hail in the wide hall
     Of huge Sejanus: run a lictor's pace:
     Stay, not to put your robes on; but away,
     With the pale troubled ensigns of great friendship
     Stamp'd in your face! Now, Marcus Lepidus,
     You still believe your former augury!
     Sejanus must go downward! You perceive
     His wane approaching fast!

  Lep. Believe me, Lucius, I wonder at this rising.

  Arr.
     Ay, and that we
     Must give our suffrage to it. You will say,
     It is to make his fall more steep and grievous:
     It may be so. But think it, they that can
     With idle wishes 'say to bring back time:
     In cases desperate, all hope is crime.
     See, see! what troops of his officious friends
     Flock to salute my lord, and start before
     My great proud lord! to get a lord-like nod!
     Attend my lord unto the senate-house!
     Bring back my lord! like servile ushers, make
     Way for my lord! proclaim his idol lordship,
     More than ten criers, or six noise of trumpets!
     Make legs, kiss hands, and take a scatter'd hair
     From my lord's eminent shoulder!
                       [Sanquinius and Haterius pass over the stage.
                                      See, Sanquinius
     With his slow belly, and his dropsy! look,
     What toiling haste he makes! yet here's another
     Retarded with the gout, will be afore him.
     Get thee Liburnian porters, thou gross fool,
     To bear thy obsequious fatness, like thy peers.
     They are met! the gout returns, and his great carriage.
                     [Lictors, Regulus, Trio, Sejanus, Satrius,
                     and many other Senators, pass over the stage.

  Lict. Give way, make place, room for the consul!

  San.
     Hail,
     Hail, great. Sejanus!

  Hat. Hail, my honour'd lord!

  Arr. We shall be mark'd anon, for our not Hail.

  Lep. That is already done.

  Arr.
     It is a note
     Of upstart greatness, to observe and watch
     For these poor trifles, which the noble mind
     Neglects and scorns.

  Lep.
     Ay, and they think themselves
     Deeply dishonour'd where they are omitted,
     As if they were necessities that help'd
     To the perfection of their dignities;
     And hate the men that but refrain them.

  Arr.
     O!
     There is a farther cause of hate. Their breasts
     Are guilty, that we know their obscure springs,
     And base beginnings; thence the anger grows.
     On. Follow.



                    SCENE IX.-Another part of the same.
                        Enter MACRO and LACO.

  Mac.
     When all are enter'd, shut the temple doors;
     And bring your guards up to the gate.

  Lac. I will.

  Mac.
     If you shall hear commotion in the senate,
     Present yourself: and charge on any man
     Shall offer to come forth.

  Lac. I am instructed.                                    [Exeunt.




                        SCENE X.-The Temple of Apollo.

              Enter HATERIUS, TRIO, SANQUINIUS, COTTA, REGULUS,
              SEJANUS, POMPONIUS, LATIARIS, LEPIDUS, ARRUNTIUS,
              and divers other Senators; Praecones, and Lictors.

  Hat. How well, his lordship looks to-day!

  Tri.
     As if
     He had been born, or made for this hour's state.

  Cat. Your fellow consul's come about, methinks?

  Tri. Ay, he is wise.

  San. Sejanus trusts him well.

  Tri. Sejanus is a noble, bounteous lord.

  Hat. He is so, and most valiant.

  Lat. And most wise.

  1 Sen. He's every thing.

  Lat.
     Worthy of all, and more
     Than bounty can bestow.

  Tri.
     This dignity
     Will make him worthy.

  Pom. Above Caesar.

  San.
     Tut,
     Caesar is but the rector of an isle,
     He of the empire.

  Tri.
     Now he will have power
     More to reward than ever.

  Cat.
     Let us look
     We be not slack in giving him our voices.

  Lat. Not I.

  San. Nor I.

  Col.
     The readier we seem
     To propagate his honours, will more bind
     His thoughts to ours.

  Hat.
     I think right with your lordship;
     It is the way to have us hold our places.

  San. Ay, and get more.

  Lat. More office and more titles.

  Pom.
     I will not lose the part I hope to share I
     n these his fortunes, for my patrimony.

  Lat. See, how Arruntius sits, and Lepidus!

  Tri. Let them alone, they will be mark'd anon.

  1 Sen. I'll do with others.

  2 Sen. So will I.

  3 Sen.
     And I.
     Men grow not in the state, but as they are planted
     Warm in his favours.

  Col. Noble Sejanus!

  Hat. Honour'd Sejanus!

  Lat. Worthy and great Sejanus!

  Arr.
     Gods! how the sponges open and take in,
     And shut again! look, look! is not he blest
     That gets a seat in eye-reach of him? more,
     That comes in ear, or tongue-reach? O but most,
     Can claw his subtle elbow, or with a buz
     Fly-blow his ears?

  Praet. Proclaim the senate's peace,
     And give last summons by the edict.

  Prae.
     Silence!
     In name of Caesar, and the senate, silence!
  Memmius Regulus, and Fulcinius Trio, consuls, these present kalends
  of June, with the first light, shall hold a senate, in the temple
  of Apollo Palatine: all that are fathers, and are registered
  fathers that have right of entering the senate, we warn or command
  you be frequently present, take knowledge the business is the
  commonwealth's: whosoever is absent, his fine or mulct will be
  taken, his excuse will not be taken.

  Tri. Note who are absent, and record their names.

  Reg.
     Fathers conscript, may what I am to utter
     Turn good and happy for the commonwealth!
     And thou, Apollo, in whose holy house
     We here have met, inspire us all with truth,
     And liberty of censure to our thought!
     The majesty of great Tiberius Caesar
     Propounds to this grave senate, the bestowing
     Upon the man he loves, honour'd Sejanus,
     The tribunitial dignity and power:
     Here are his letters, signed with his signet.
     What pleaseth now the fathers to be done?

  Sen. Read, read them, open, publicly read them.

  Cot.
     Caesar hath honour'd his own greatness much
     In thinking of this act.

  Tri.
     It was a thought
     Happy, and worthy Caesar.

  Lat.
     And the lord
     As worthy it, on whom it is directed!

  Hat. Most worthy!

  San.
     Rome did never boast the virtue
     That could give envy bounds, but his: Sejanus----

  1 Sen. Honour'd and noble!

  2 Sen. Good and great Sejanus!

  Arr. O, most tame slavery, and fierce flattery!

  Prae. Silence!

                 TIBERIUS CAESAR to the Senate, greeting.

  If you, conscript fathers, with your children, be in health, it is
  abundantly well: we with our friends here are so. The care of the
  commonwealth, howsoever we are removed in person, cannot be absent
  to our thought; although, oftentimes, even to princes most present,
  the truth of their own affairs is hid, than which, nothing falls
  out more miserable  to a state, or makes the art of governing more
  difficult. But since it hath been our easeful happiness to enjoy
  both the aids and industry of so vigilant a senate, we profess to
  have been the more indulgent to our pleasures, not as being
  careless of our office, but rather secure of the necessity. Neither
  do these common rumours of many, and infamous libels published
  against our retirement, at all afflict us; being born more out of
  men's ignorance than their malice: and will, neglected, find their
  own grave quickly, whereas, too sensibly acknowledged, it would
  make their obloquy ours. Nor do we desire their authors, though
  found, be censured, since in a free state, as ours, all men ought
  to enjoy both their minds and tongues free.

  Arr. The lapwing, the lapwing!


  Yet in things which shall worthily and more near concern the
  majesty of a prince, we shall fear to be so unnaturally cruel to
  our own fame, as to neglect them. True it is, conscript fathers,
  that we have raised Sejanus from obscure, and almost unknown gentry

  Sen. How, how!


  to the highest and most conspicuous point of greatness, and, we
  hope, deservingly, yet not without danger: it being a most bold
  hazard in that sovereign, who, by his particular love to one, dares
  adventure the hatred of all his other subjects.

  Arr. This touches; the blood turns.


  But we affy in your loves and understandings, and do no way suspect
  the merit of our Sejanus, to make our favours offensive to any.

  Sen. O! good, good.


  Though we could have wished his zeal had run a calmer course
  against Agrippina and our nephews, howsoever the openness of their
  actions declared them delinquents, and, that he would have
  remembered, no innocence is so safe, but it rejoiceth to stand in
  the sight of mercy: the use of which in us, he hath so quite taken
  away, towards them, by his loyal fury, as now our clemency would be
  thought but wearied cruelty, if we should offer to exercise it.

  Arr. I thank him; there I look'd for't. A good fox!


  Some there be that would interpret this his public severity to be
  particular ambition, and that, under a pretext of service to us, he
  doth but remove his own lets: alleging the strengths he hath made
  to himself, by the praetorian soldiers, by his faction in court and
  senate, by the offices he holds himself, and confers on others, his
  popularity and dependents, his urging and almost driving us to this
  our unwilling retirement, and, lastly, his aspiring to be our
  son-in-law.

  Sen. This is strange!

  Arr. I shall anon believe your vultures, Marcus.


  Your wisdoms, conscript fathers, are able to examine, and censure
  these suggestions. But, were they left to our absolving voice, we
  durst pronounce them, as we think them, most malicious.

  Sen. O, he has restored all; list!
     And give last summons by the edict.

  Prae.
     Silence!
     In name of Caesar, and the senate, silence!
  Memmius Regulus, and Fulcinius Trio, consuls, these present kalends
  of June, with the first light, shall hold a senate, in the temple
  of Apollo Palatine: all that are fathers, and are registered
  fathers that have right of entering the senate, we warn or command
  you be frequently present, take knowledge the business is the
  commonwealth's: whosoever is absent, his fine or mulct will be
  taken, his excuse will not be taken.

  Tri. Note who are absent, and record their names.

  Reg.
     Fathers conscript, may what I am to utter
     Turn good and happy for the commonwealth!
     And thou, Apollo, in whose holy house
     We here have met, inspire us all with truth,
     And liberty of censure to our thought!
     The majesty of great Tiberius Caesar
     Propounds to this grave senate, the bestowing
     Upon the man he loves, honour'd Sejanus,
     The tribunitial dignity and power:
     Here are his letters, signed with his signet.
     What pleaseth now the fathers to be done?

  Sen. Read, read them, open, publicly read them.

  Cot.
     Caesar hath honour'd his own greatness much
     In thinking of this act.

  Tri.
     It was a thought
     Happy, and worthy Caesar.

  Lat.
     And the lord
     As worthy it, on whom it is directed!

  Hat. Most worthy!

  San.
     Rome did never boast the virtue
     That could give envy bounds, but his: Sejanus----

  1 Sen. Honour'd and noble!

  2 Sen. Good and great Sejanus!

  Arr. O, most tame slavery, and fierce flattery!

  Prae. Silence!

                 TIBERIUS CAESAR to the Senate, greeting.

  "If you, conscript fathers, with your children, be in health, it is
  abundantly well: we with our friends here are so. The care of the
  commonwealth, howsoever we are removed in person, cannot be absent
  to our thought; although, oftentimes, even to princes most present,
  the truth of their own affairs is hid, than which, nothing falls
  out more miserable  to a state, or makes the art of governing more
  difficult. But since it hath been our easeful happiness to enjoy
  both the aids and industry of so vigilant a senate, we profess to
  have been the more indulgent to our pleasures, not as being
  careless of our office, but rather secure of the necessity. Neither
  do these common rumours of many, and infamous libels published
  against our retirement, at all afflict us; being born more out of
  men's ignorance than their malice: and will, neglected, find their
  own grave quickly, whereas, too sensibly acknowledged, it would
  make their obloquy ours. Nor do we desire their authors, though
  found, be censured, since in a free state, as ours, all men ought
  to enjoy both their minds and tongues free."

  Arr. The lapwing, the lapwing!

  "Yet in things which shall worthily and more near concern the
  majesty of a prince, we shall fear to be so unnaturally cruel to
  our own fame, as to neglect them. True it is, conscript fathers,
  that we have raised Sejanus from obscure, and almost unknown
  gentry"

  Sen. How, how!

  "to the highest and most conspicuous point of greatness, and, we
  hope, deservingly, yet not without danger: it being a most bold
  hazard in that sovereign, who, by his particular love to one, dares
  adventure the hatred of all his other subjects."

  Arr. This touches; the blood turns.

  "But we affy in your loves and understandings, and do no way
  suspect the merit of our Sejanus, to make our favours offensive to
  any."

  Sen. O! good, good.

  "Though we could have wished his zeal had run a calmer course
  against Agrippina and our nephews, howsoever the openness of their
  actions declared them delinquents, and, that he would have
  remembered, no innocence is so safe, but it rejoiceth to stand in
  the sight of mercy: the use of which in us, he hath so quite taken
  away, towards them, by his loyal fury, as now our clemency would be
  thought but wearied cruelty, if we should offer to exercise it."

  Arr. I thank him; there I look'd for't. A good fox!

  "Some there be that would interpret this his public severity to be
  particular ambition, and that, under a pretext of service to us, he
  doth but remove his own lets: alleging the strengths he hath made
  to himself, by the praetorian soldiers, by his faction in court and
  senate, by the offices he holds himself, and confers on others, his
  popularity and dependents, his urging and almost driving us to this
  our unwilling retirement, and, lastly, his aspiring to be our
  son-in-law."

  Sen. This is strange!

  Arr. I shall anon believe your vultures, Marcus.

  "Your wisdoms, conscript fathers, are able to examine, and censure
  these suggestions. But, were they left to our absolving voice, we
  durst pronounce them, as we think them, most malicious."

  Sen. O, he has restored all; list!

  "Yet are they offered to be averred, and on the lives of the
  informers. What we should say, or rather what we should not say,
  lords of the senate, if this be true, our gods and goddesses
  confound us if we know! Only we must think, we have placed our
  benefits ill; and conclude, that in our choice, either we were
  wanting to the gods, or the gods to us."
                                    [The Senators shift their places.

  Arr. The place grows hot; they shift.

  "We have not been covetous, honourable fathers, to change, neither
  is it now any new lust that alters our affection, or old lothing,
  but those needful jealousies of state, that warn wiser princes
  hourly to provide their safety, and do teach them how learned a
  thing it is to beware of the humblest enemy; much more of those
  great ones, whom their own employed favours have made fit for their
  fears."

  1 Sen. Away.

  2 Sen. Sit farther.

  Cot. Let's remove-

  Arr. Gods! how the leaves drop off, this little wind!

  "We therefore desire, that the offices he holds be first seized by
  the senate, and himself suspended from all exercise of place or
  power--"

  Sen. How!

  San. [thrusting by.] By your leave.

  Arr.
     Come, porpoise; where's Haterius?
     His gout keeps him most miserably constant;
     Your dancing shews a tempest.

  Sej. Read no more.

  Reg. Lords of the senate, hold your seats: read on.

  Sej. These letters they are forged.

  Reg. A guard! sit still.
                                     Enter LACO, with the Guards.
  Arr. Here's change!

  Reg. Bid silence, and read forward.

  Prae. Silence!----

  "and himself suspended from all exercise of place or power, but
  till due and mature trial be made of his innocency, which yet we
  can faintly apprehend the necessity to doubt. If, conscript
  fathers, to your more searching wisdoms, there shall appear farther
  cause----or of farther proceeding, either to seizure of lands,
  goods, or more----it is not our power that shall limit your
  authority, or our favour that must corrupt your justice: either
  were dishonourable in you, and both uncharitable to ourself. We
  would willingly be present with your counsels in this business, but
  the danger of so potent a faction, if it should prove so, forbids
  our attempting it: except one of the consuls would be entreated for
  our safety, to undertake the guard of us home; then we should most
  readily adventure. In the mean time, it shall not be fit for us to
  importune so judicious a senate, who know  how much they hurt the
  innocent, that spare the guilty; and how grateful a sacrifice to
  the gods is the life of an ingrateful person, We reflect not, in
  this, on Sejanus, (notwithstanding, if you keep an eye upon him-and
  there is Latiaris, a senator, and Pinnarius Natta, two of his most
  trusted ministers, and so professed, whom we desire not to have
  apprehended,) but as the necessity of the cause exacts it."

  Reg. A guard on Latiaris!

  Arr.
     O, the spy,
     The reverend spy is caught! who pities him?
     Reward, sir, for your service: now, you have done
     Your property, you see what use is made!
                                [Exeunt Latiaris and Natta, guarded.
     Hang up the instrument.

  Sej. Give leave.

  Lac.
     Stand, stand!
     He comes upon his 'death, that doth advance
     An inch toward my point.

  Sej. Have we no friends here?

  Arr.
     Hush'd!
     Where now are all the hails and acclamations?
                                                      Enter MACRO.
  Mac. Hail to the consuls, and this noble senate!

  Sej.
     Is Macro here?
        O, thou art lost, Sejanus!                        [Aside.

  Mac.
     Sit still, and unaffrighted, reverend fathers:
     Macro, by Caesar's grace, the new-made provost,
     And now possest of the praetorian bands,
     An honour late belong'd to that proud man,
     Bids you be safe: and to your constant doom
     Of his deservings, offers you the surety
     Of all the soldiers, tribunes, and centurions,
     Received in our command.

  Reg. Sejanus, Sejanus, Stand forth, Sejanus!

  Sej. Am I call'd?

  Mac.
     Ay, thou,
     Thou insolent monster, art bid stand.

  Sej.
     Why, Macro.
     It hath been otherwise between you and I;
     This court, that knows us both, hath seen a difference,
     And can, if it be pleased to speak, confirm
     Whose insolence is most.

  Mac.
     Come down, Typhoeus.
     If mine be most, lo! thus I make it more;
     Kick up thy heels in air, tear off thy robe,
     Play with thy beard and nostrils. Thus 'tis fit
     (And no man take compassion of thy state)
     To use th' ingrateful viper, tread his brains
     Into the earth.

  Reg. Forbear.

  Mac.
     If I could lose
     All my humanity now, 'twere well to torture
     So meriting a traitor.-Wherefore, fathers,
     Sit you amazed and silent; and not censure
     This wretch, who, in the hour he first rebell'd
     'Gainst Caesar's bounty, did condemn himself?
     Phlegra, the field where all the sons of earth
     Muster'd against the gods, did ne'er acknowledge
     So proud and huge a monster.

  Reg.
     Take him hence;
     And all the gods guard Caesar!

  Tri. Take him hence.

  Hat. Hence.

  Cot. To the dungeon with him.

  San. He deserves it.

  Sen. Crown all our doors with bays.

  San.
     And let an ox,
     With gilded horns and garlands, straight be led
     Unto the Capitol----

  Hat.
     And sacrificed
     To Jove, for Caesar's safety.

  Tri.
     All our gods
     Be present still to Caesar!

  Cot. Phoebus.

  San. Mars.

  Hat. Diana.

  San. Pallas.

  Sen.
     Juno, Mercury,
     All guard him!

  Mac. Forth, thou prodigy of men!           [Exit Sejanus, guarded.

  Cot. Let all the traitor's titles be defaced.

  Tri. His images and statues be pull'd down.

  Hat. His chariot-wheels be broken.

  Arr.
     And the legs
     Of the poor horses, that deseryed nought,
     Let them be broken too!

                [Exeunt Lictors, Praecones, Macro, Regulus, Trio,
                Haterius, and Sanquinius: manent Lepidus, Arruntius,
                and a few Senators.

  Lep.
     O violent change,
     And whirl of men's affections!

  Arr.
     Like, as both
     Their bulks and souls were bound on Fortune's wheel,
     And must act only with her motion.

  Lep.
     Who would depend upon the popular air,
     Or voice of men, that have to-day beheld
     That which, if all the gods had fore-declared,
     Would not have been believed, Sejanus' fall?
     He, that this morn rose proudly, as the sun,
     And, breaking through a mist of clients' breath,
     Came on, as gazed at and admired as he,
     When superstitious Moors salute his light!
     That had our servile nobles waiting him
     As common grooms; and hanging on his look,
     No less than human life on destiny!
     That had men's knees as frequent as the gods;
     And sacrifices more than Rome had altars:
     And this man fall! fall? ay, without a look
     That durst appear his friend, or lend so much
     Of vain relief, to his changed state, as pity!

  Arr.
     They that before, like gnats, play'd in his beams,
     And throng'd to circumscribe him, now not seen
     Nor deign to hold a common seat with him!
     Others, that waited him unto the senate,
     Now inhumanely ravish him to prison,
     Whom, but this morn, they follow'd as their lord!
     Guard through the streets, bound like a fugitive,
     Instead of wreaths give fetters, strokes for stoops,
     Blind shames for honours, and black taunts for titles!
     Who would trust slippery chance?

  Lep.
     They that would make
     Themselves her spoil; and foolishly forget,
     When she doth flatter, that she comes to prey.
     Fortune, thou hadst no deity, if men
     Had wisdom: we have placed thee so high,
     By fond belief in thy felicity.
                         [Shout within.] The gods guard Caesar!
                                     All the gods guard Caesar!

                     Re-enter MACRO, REGULUS, and divers Senators.

  Mac.
     Now, great Sejanus, you that awed the state,
     And sought to bring the nobles to your whip;
     That would be Caesar's tutor, and dispose
     Of dignities and offices! that had
     The public head still bare to your designs,
     And made the general voice to echo yours!
     That look'd for salutations twelve score off,
     And would have pyramids, yea temples, rear'd
     To your huge greatness; now you lie as flat,
     As was your pride advanced!

  Reg. Thanks to the gods!

  Sen.
     And praise to Macro, that hath saved Rome!
     Liberty, liberty, liberty! Lead on,
     And praise to Macro, that hath saved Rome!
                              [Exeunt all but Arruntius and Lepidus.

  Arr.
     I prophesy, out of the senate's flattery,
     That this new fellow, Macro, will become
     A greater prodigy in Rome, than he
     That now is fallen.
                           Enter TERENTIUS.

  Ter.
     O you, whose minds are good,
     And have not forced all mankind from your breasts;
     That yet have so much stock of virtue left,
     To pity guilty states, when they are wretched:
     Lend your soft ears to hear, and eyes to weep,
     Deeds done by men, beyond the acts of furies.
     The eager multitude (who never yet
     Knew why to love or hate, but only pleased
     T' express their rage of power) no sooner heard
     The murmur of Sejanus in decline,
     But with that speed and heat of appetite,
     With which they greedily devour the way
     To some great sports, or a new theatre,
     They fill'd the Capitol, and Pompey's Cirque,
     Where, like so many mastiffs, biting stones,
     As if his statues now were sensitive
     Of their wild fury; first, they tear them down;
     Then fastening ropes, drag them along the streets,
     Crying in scorn, This, this was that rich head
     Was crown'd with garlands, and with odours, this
     That was in Rome so reverenced! Now
     The furnace and the bellows shall to work,
     The great Sejanus crack, and piece by piece
     Drop in the founder's pit.

  Lep. O popular rage!

  Ter.
     The whilst the senate at the temple of Concord
     Make haste to meet again, and thronging cry,
     Let us condemn him, tread him down in water,
     While he doth lie upon the bank; away!
     While some more tardy, cry unto their bearers,
     He will be censured ere we come; run, knaves,
     And use that furious diligence, for fear
     Their bondmen should inform against their slackness,
     And bring their quaking flesh unto the hook:
     The rout they follow with confused voice,
     Crying, they're glad, say, they could ne'er abide him,
     Enquire what man he was, what kind of face,
     What beard he had, what nose, what lips?
     Protest They ever did presage he'd come to this;
     They never thought him wise, nor valiant; ask
     After his garments, when he dies, what death;
     And not a beast of all the herd demands,
     What was his crime, or who were his accusers,
     Under what proof or testimony he fell?
     There came, says one, a huge long-worded letter
     From Capreae against him.  Did there so?
     O, they are satisfied; no more.

  Lep. Alas!
     They follow Fortune, and hate men condemn'd,
     Guilty or not.

  Arr.
     But had Sejanus thrived
     In his design, and prosperously opprest
     The old Tiberius; then, in that same minute,
     These very rascals, that now rage like furies,
     Would have proclaim'd Sejanus emperor.

  Lep. But what hath follow'd?

  Ter.
     Sentence by the senate,
     To lose his head; which was no sooner off,
     But that and the unfortunate trunk were seized
     By the rude multitude; who not content
     With what the forward justice of the state.
     Officiously had done, with violent rage
     Have rent it limb from limb. A thousand heads,
     A thousand hands, ten thousand tongues and voices,
     Employ'd at once in several acts of malice!
     Old men not staid with age, virgins with shame,
     Late wives with loss of husbands, mothers of children,
     Losing all grief in joy of his sad fall,
     Run quite transported with their cruelty!
     These mounting at his head, these at his face,
     These digging out his eyes, those with his brains
     Sprinkling themselves, their houses and their friends;
     Others are met, have ravish'd thence an arm,
     And deal small pieces of the flesh for favours;
     These with a thigh, this hath cut off his hands,
     And this his feet; these fingers and these toes;
     That hath his liver, he his heart: there wants
     Nothing but room for wrath, and place for hatred!
     What cannot oft be done, is now o'erdone.
     The whole, and all of what was great Sejanus,
     And, next to Caesar, did possess the World,
     Now torn and scatter'd, as he needs no grave;
     Each little dust covers a little part:
     So lies he no where, and yet often buried!
                                             Enter NUNTIUS
  Arr. More of Sejanus

  Nun. Yes.

  Lep.
     What can be added?
     We know him dead.

  Nun.
     Then there begin your pity.
     There is enough behind to melt ev'n Rome,
     And Caesar into tears; since never slave
     Could yet so highly offend, but tyranny,
     In torturing him, would make him worth lamenting.----
     A son and daughter to the dead Sejanus,
     (Of whom there is not now so much remaining
     As would give fast'ning to the hangman's hook,)
     Have they drawn forth for farther sacrifice;
     Whose tenderness of knowledge, unripe years,
     And childish silly innocence was such,
     As scarce would lend them feeling of their danger:
     The girl so simple, as she often ask'd
     "Where they would lead her? for what cause they dragg'd her?"
     Cried, "She would do no more:" that she could take
     "Warning with beating." And because our laws
     Admit no virgin immature to die,
     The wittily and strangely cruel Macro
     Deliver'd her to be deflower'd and spoil'd,
     By the rude lust of the licentious hangman,
     Then to be strangled with her harmless brother.

  Lep.
     O, act most worthy hell, and lasting night,
     To hide it from the world!

  Nun.
     Their bodies thrown
     Into the Gemonies, (I know not how,
     Or by what accident return'd.) the mother,
     The expulsed Apicata, finds them there;
     Whom when she saw lie spread on the degrees,
     After a world of fury on herself,
     Tearing her hair, defacing of her face,
     Beating her breasts and womb, kneeling amaz'd,
     Crying to heaven, then to them; at last,
     Her drowned voice gat up above her woes,
     And with such black and bitter execrations,
     As might affright the gods, and force the sun
     Run backward to the east; nay, make the old
     Deformed chaos rise again, to o'erwhelm
     Them, us, and all the world, she fills the air,
     Upbraids the heavens with their partial dooms,
     Defies their tyrannous powers, and demands,
     What she, and those poor innocents have transgress'd,
     That they must suffer such a share in vengeance,
     Whilst Livia, Lygdus, and Eudemus live,
     Who, as she says, and firmly vows to prove it
     To Caesar and the senate, poison'd Drusus?

  Lup. Confederates with her husband!

  Nun. Ay.

  Lep. Strange act!

  Arr.
     And strangely open'd: what says now my monster,
     The multitude? they reel now, do they not?

  Nun.
     Their gall is gone, and now they 'gin to weep
     The mischief they have done.

  Arr. I thank 'em, rogues.

  Nun.
     Part are so stupid, or so flexible,
     As they believe him innocent; all grieve:
     And some whose hands yet reek with his warm blood,
     And gripe the part which they did tear of him,
     Wish him collected and created new.

  Lep.
     How Fortune plies her sports, when she begins
     To practise them! pursues, continues, adds,
     Confounds with varying her impassion'd moods!

  Arr.
     Dost thou hope, Fortune, to redeem thy crimes,
     To make amend for thy ill-placed favours,
     With these strange punishments? Forbear, you things
     That stand upon the pinnacles of state,
     To boast your slippery height; when you do fall,
     You pash yourselves in pieces, ne'er to rise;
     And he that lends you pity, is not wise.

  Ter.
     Let this example move the insolent man,
     Not to grow proud and careless of the gods.
     It is an odious wisdom to blaspheme,
     Much more to slighten, or deny their powers:
     For, whom the morning saw so great and high,
     Thus low and little, fore the even doth lie.          [Exeunt



*****



GLOSSARY

ABATE, cast down, subdue.

ABHORRING, repugnant (to), at variance.

ABJECT, base, degraded thing, outcast.

ABRASE, smooth, blank.

ABSOLUTE(LY), faultless(ly).

ABSTRACTED, abstract, abstruse.

ABUSE, deceive, insult, dishonour, make ill use of.

ACATER, caterer.

ACATES, cates.

ACCEPTIVE, willing, ready to accept, receive.

ACCOMMODATE, fit, befitting.  (The word was a fashionable
one and used on all occasions.  See "Henry IV.," pt. 2,
iii. 4).

ACCOST, draw near, approach.

ACKNOWN, confessedly acquainted with.

ACME, full maturity.

ADALANTADO, lord deputy or governor of a Spanish province.

ADJECTION, addition.

ADMIRATION, astonishment.

ADMIRE, wonder, wonder at.

ADROP, philosopher's stone, or substance from which obtained.

ADSCRIVE, subscribe.

ADULTERATE, spurious, counterfeit.

ADVANCE, lift.

ADVERTISE, inform, give intelligence.

ADVERTISED, "be--," be it known to you.

ADVERTISEMENT, intelligence.

ADVISE, consider, bethink oneself, deliberate.

ADVISED, informed, aware; "are you--?" have you found that out?

AFFECT, love, like; aim at; move.

AFFECTED, disposed; beloved.

AFFECTIONATE, obstinate; prejudiced.

AFFECTS, affections.

AFFRONT, "give the--," face.

AFFY, have confidence in; betroth.

AFTER, after the manner of.

AGAIN, AGAINST, in anticipation of.

AGGRAVATE, increase, magnify, enlarge upon.

AGNOMINATION.  See Paranomasie.

AIERY, nest, brood.

AIM, guess.

ALL HID, children's cry at hide-and-seek.

ALL-TO, completely, entirely ("all-to-be-laden").

ALLOWANCE, approbation, recognition.

ALMA-CANTARAS (astronomy), parallels of altitude.

ALMAIN, name of a dance.

ALMUTEN, planet of chief influence in the horoscope.

ALONE, unequalled, without peer.

ALUDELS, subliming pots.

AMAZED, confused, perplexed.

AMBER, AMBRE, ambergris.

AMBREE, MARY, a woman noted for her valour at the
siege of Ghent, 1458.

AMES-ACE, lowest throw at dice.

AMPHIBOLIES, ambiguities.

AMUSED, bewildered, amazed.

AN, if.

ANATOMY, skeleton, or dissected body.

ANDIRONS, fire-dogs.

ANGEL, gold coin worth 10 shillings, stamped with the
figure of the archangel Michael.

ANNESH CLEARE, spring known as Agnes le Clare.

ANSWER, return hit in fencing.

ANTIC, ANTIQUE, clown, buffoon.

ANTIC, like a buffoon.

ANTIPERISTASIS, an opposition which enhances the quality
it opposes.

APOZEM, decoction.

APPERIL, peril.

APPLE-JOHN, APPLE-SQUIRE, pimp, pander.

APPLY, attach.

APPREHEND, take into custody.

APPREHENSIVE, quick of perception; able to perceive and appreciate.

APPROVE, prove, confirm.

APT, suit, adapt; train, prepare; dispose, incline.

APT(LY), suitable(y), opportune(ly).

APTITUDE, suitableness.

ARBOR, "make the--," cut up the game (Gifford).

ARCHES, Court of Arches.

ARCHIE, Archibald Armstrong, jester to James I. and Charles I.

ARGAILE, argol, crust or sediment in wine casks.

ARGENT-VIVE, quicksilver.

ARGUMENT, plot of a drama; theme, subject; matter in question;
token, proof.

ARRIDE, please.

ARSEDINE, mixture of copper and zinc, used as an imitation of
gold-leaf.

ARTHUR, PRINCE, reference to an archery show by a society who
assumed arms, etc., of Arthur's knights.

ARTICLE, item.

ARTIFICIALLY, artfully.

ASCENSION, evaporation, distillation.

ASPIRE, try to reach, obtain, long for.

ASSALTO (Italian), assault.

ASSAY, draw a knife along the belly of the deer, a
ceremony of the hunting-field.

ASSOIL, solve.

ASSURE, secure possession or reversion of.

ATHANOR, a digesting furnace, calculated to keep up a
constant heat.

ATONE, reconcile.

ATTACH, attack, seize.

AUDACIOUS, having spirit and confidence.

AUTHENTIC(AL), of authority, authorised, trustworthy, genuine.

AVISEMENT, reflection, consideration.

AVOID, begone! get rid of.

AWAY WITH, endure.

AZOCH, Mercurius Philosophorum.

BABION, baboon.

BABY, doll.

BACK-SIDE, back premises.

BAFFLE, treat with contempt.

BAGATINE, Italian coin, worth about the third of a farthing.

BAIARD, horse of magic powers known to old romance.

BALDRICK, belt worn across the breast to support bugle, etc.

BALE (of dice), pair.

BALK, overlook, pass by, avoid.

BALLACE, ballast.

BALLOO, game at ball.

BALNEUM (BAIN MARIE), a vessel for holding hot water
in which other vessels are stood for heating.

BANBURY, "brother of--," Puritan.

BANDOG, dog tied or chained up.

BANE, woe, ruin.

BANQUET, a light repast; dessert.

BARB, to clip gold.

BARBEL, fresh-water fish.

BARE, meer; bareheaded; it was "a particular mark of state
and grandeur for the coachman to be uncovered" (Gifford).

BARLEY-BREAK, game somewhat similar to base.

BASE, game of prisoner's base.

BASES, richly embroidered skirt reaching to the knees, or
lower.

BASILISK, fabulous reptile, believed to slay with its eye.

BASKET, used for the broken provision collected for prisoners.

BASON, basons, etc., were beaten by the attendant mob when
bad characters were "carted."

BATE, be reduced; abate, reduce.

BATOON, baton, stick.

BATTEN, feed, grow fat.

BAWSON, badger.

BEADSMAN, prayer-man, one engaged to pray for another.

BEAGLE, small hound; fig. spy.

BEAR IN HAND, keep in suspense, deceive with false hopes.

BEARWARD, bear leader.

BEDPHERE.  See Phere.

BEDSTAFF, (?) wooden pin in the side of the bedstead for
supporting the bedclothes (Johnson); one of the sticks or
"laths"; a stick used in making a bed.

BEETLE, heavy mallet.

BEG, "I'd--him," the custody of minors and idiots was
begged for; likewise property fallen forfeit to the Crown
("your house had been begged").

BELL-MAN, night watchman.

BENJAMIN, an aromatic gum.

BERLINA, pillory.

BESCUMBER, defile.

BESLAVE, beslabber.

BESOGNO, beggar.

BESPAWLE, bespatter.

BETHLEHEM GABOR, Transylvanian hero, proclaimed King of Hungary.

BEVER, drinking.

BEVIS, SIR, knight of romance whose horse was equally celebrated.

BEWRAY, reveal, make known.

BEZANT, heraldic term: small gold circle.

BEZOAR'S STONE, a remedy known by this name was a
supposed antidote to poison.

BID-STAND, highwayman.

BIGGIN, cap, similar to that worn by the Beguines; nightcap.

BILIVE (belive), with haste.

BILK, nothing, empty talk.

BILL, kind of pike.

BILLET, wood cut for fuel, stick.

BIRDING, thieving.

BLACK SANCTUS, burlesque hymn, any unholy riot.

BLANK, originally a small French coin.

BLANK, white.

BLANKET, toss in a blanket.

BLAZE, outburst of violence.

BLAZE, (her.) blazon; publish abroad.

BLAZON, armorial bearings; fig. all that pertains to
good birth and breeding.

BLIN, "withouten--," without ceasing.

BLOW, puff up.

BLUE, colour of servants' livery, hence "--order,"
"--waiters."

BLUSHET, blushing one.

BOB, jest, taunt.

BOB, beat, thump.

BODGE, measure.

BODKIN, dagger, or other short, pointed weapon; long
pin with which the women fastened up their hair.

BOLT, roll (of material).

BOLT, dislodge, rout out; sift (boulting-tub).

BOLT'S-HEAD, long, straight-necked vessel for distillation.

BOMBARD SLOPS, padded, puffed-out breeches.

BONA ROBA, "good, wholesome, plum-cheeked wench" (Johnson)--not always used in compliment.

BONNY-CLABBER, sour butter-milk.

BOOKHOLDER, prompter.

BOOT, "to--," into the bargain; "no--," of no avail.

BORACHIO, bottle made of skin.

BORDELLO, brothel.

BORNE IT, conducted, carried it through.

BOTTLE (of hay), bundle, truss.

BOTTOM, skein or ball of thread; vessel.

BOURD, jest.

BOVOLI, snails or cockles dressed in the Italian manner
(Gifford).

BOW-POT, flower vase or pot.

BOYS, "terrible--," "angry--," roystering young bucks.
(See Nares).

BRABBLES (BRABBLESH), brawls.

BRACH, bitch.

BRADAMANTE, a heroine in "Orlando Furioso."

BRADLEY, ARTHUR OF, a lively character commemorated in
ballads.

BRAKE, frame for confining a horse's feet while being
shod, or strong curb or bridle; trap.

BRANCHED, with "detached sleeve ornaments, projecting
from the shoulders of the gown" (Gifford).

BRANDISH, flourish of weapon.

BRASH, brace.

BRAVE, bravado, braggart speech.

BRAVE (adv.), gaily, finely (apparelled).

BRAVERIES, gallants.

BRAVERY, extravagant gaiety of apparel.

BRAVO, bravado, swaggerer.

BRAZEN-HEAD, speaking head made by Roger Bacon.

BREATHE, pause for relaxation; exercise.

BREATH UPON, speak dispraisingly of.

BREND, burn.

BRIDE-ALE, wedding feast.

BRIEF, abstract; (mus.) breve.

BRISK, smartly dressed.

BRIZE, breese, gadfly.

BROAD-SEAL, state seal.

BROCK, badger (term of contempt).

BROKE, transact business as a broker.

BROOK, endure, put up with.

BROUGHTON, HUGH, an English divine and Hebrew scholar.

BRUIT, rumour.

BUCK, wash.

BUCKLE, bend.

BUFF, leather made of buffalo skin, used for military
and serjeants' coats, etc.

BUFO, black tincture.

BUGLE, long-shaped bead.

BULLED, (?) bolled, swelled.

BULLIONS, trunk hose.

BULLY, term of familiar endearment.

BUNGY, Friar Bungay, who had a familiar in the shape of a dog.

BURDEN, refrain, chorus.

BURGONET, closely-fitting helmet with visor.

BURGULLION, braggadocio.

BURN, mark wooden measures ("--ing of cans").

BURROUGH, pledge, security.

BUSKIN, half-boot, foot gear reaching high up the leg.

BUTT-SHAFT, barbless arrow for shooting at butts.

BUTTER, NATHANIEL ("Staple of News"), a compiler of general
news.  (See Cunningham).

BUTTERY-HATCH, half-door shutting off the buttery, where
provisions and liquors were stored.

BUY, "he bought me," formerly the guardianship of wards
could be bought.

BUZ, exclamation to enjoin silence.

BUZZARD, simpleton.

BY AND BY, at once.

BY(E), "on the __," incidentally, as of minor or secondary
importance; at the side.

BY-CHOP, by-blow, bastard.

CADUCEUS, Mercury's wand.

CALIVER, light kind of musket.

CALLET, woman of ill repute.

CALLOT, coif worn on the wigs of our judges or
serjeants-at-law (Gifford).

CALVERED, crimped, or sliced and pickled.  (See Nares).

CAMOUCCIO, wretch, knave.

CAMUSED, flat.

CAN, knows.

CANDLE-RENT, rent from house property.

CANDLE-WASTER, one who studies late.

CANTER, sturdy beggar.

CAP OF MAINTENCE, an insignia of dignity, a cap of state
borne before kings at their coronation; also an heraldic term.

CAPABLE, able to comprehend, fit to receive instruction,
impression.

CAPANEUS, one of the "Seven against Thebes."

CARACT, carat, unit of weight for precious stones, etc.;
value, worth.

CARANZA, Spanish author of a book on duelling.

CARCANET, jewelled ornament for the neck.

CARE, take care; object.

CAROSH, coach, carriage.

CARPET, table-cover.

CARRIAGE, bearing, behaviour.

CARWHITCHET, quip, pun.

CASAMATE, casemate, fortress.

CASE, a pair.

CASE, "in--," in condition.

CASSOCK, soldier's loose overcoat.

CAST, flight of hawks, couple.

CAST, throw dice; vomit; forecast, calculate.

CAST, cashiered.

CASTING-GLASS, bottle for sprinkling perfume.

CASTRIL, kestrel, falcon.

CAT, structure used in sieges.

CATAMITE, old form of "ganymede."

CATASTROPHE, conclusion.

CATCHPOLE, sheriff's officer.

CATES, dainties, provisions.

CATSO, rogue, cheat.

CAUTELOUS, crafty, artful.

CENSURE, criticism; sentence.

CENSURE, criticise; pass sentence, doom.

CERUSE, cosmetic containing white lead.

CESS, assess.

CHANGE, "hunt--," follow a fresh scent.

CHAPMAN, retail dealer.

CHARACTER, handwriting.

CHARGE, expense.

CHARM, subdue with magic, lay a spell on, silence.

CHARMING, exercising magic power.

CHARTEL, challenge.

CHEAP, bargain, market.

CHEAR, CHEER, comfort, encouragement; food, entertainment.

CHECK AT, aim reproof at.

CHEQUIN, gold Italian coin.

CHEVRIL, from kidskin, which is elastic and pliable.

CHIAUS, Turkish envoy; used for a cheat, swindler.

CHILDERMASS DAY, Innocents' Day.

CHOKE-BAIL, action which does not allow of bail.

CHRYSOPOEIA, alchemy.

CHRYSOSPERM, ways of producing gold.

CIBATION, adding fresh substances to supply the waste
of evaporation.

CIMICI, bugs.

CINOPER, cinnabar.

CIOPPINI, chopine, lady's high shoe.

CIRCLING BOY, "a species of roarer; one who in some way
drew a man into a snare, to cheat or rob him" (Nares).

CIRCUMSTANCE, circumlocution, beating about the bush;
ceremony, everything pertaining to a certain condition;
detail, particular.

CITRONISE, turn citron colour.

CITTERN, kind of guitar.

CITY-WIRES, woman of fashion, who made use of wires
for hair and dress.

CIVIL, legal.

CLAP, clack, chatter.

CLAPPER-DUDGEON, downright beggar.

CLAPS HIS DISH, a clap, or clack, dish (dish with a
movable lid) was carried by beggars and lepers to show
that the vessel was empty, and to give sound of their
approach.

CLARIDIANA, heroine of an old romance.

CLARISSIMO, Venetian noble.

CLEM, starve.

CLICKET, latch.

CLIM O' THE CLOUGHS, etc., wordy heroes of romance.

CLIMATE, country.

CLOSE, secret, private; secretive.

CLOSENESS, secrecy.

CLOTH, arras, hangings.

CLOUT, mark shot at, bull's eye.

CLOWN, countryman, clodhopper.

COACH-LEAVES, folding blinds.

COALS, "bear no--," submit to no affront.

COAT-ARMOUR, coat of arms.

COAT-CARD, court-card.

COB-HERRING, HERRING-COB, a young herring.

COB-SWAN, male swan.

COCK-A-HOOP, denoting unstinted jollity; thought to
be derived from turning on the tap that all might
drink to the full of the flowing liquor.

COCKATRICE, reptile supposed to be produced from a
cock's egg and to kill by its eye--used as a term
of reproach for a woman.

COCK-BRAINED, giddy, wild.

COCKER, pamper.

COCKSCOMB, fool's cap.

COCKSTONE, stone said to be found in a cock's
gizzard, and to possess particular virtues.

CODLING, softening by boiling.

COFFIN, raised crust of a pie.

COG, cheat, wheedle.

COIL, turmoil, confusion, ado.

COKELY, master of a puppet-show (Whalley).

COKES, fool, gull.

COLD-CONCEITED, having cold opinion of, coldly
affected towards.

COLE-HARBOUR, a retreat for people of all sorts.

COLLECTION, composure; deduction.

COLLOP, small slice, piece of flesh.

COLLY, blacken.

COLOUR, pretext.

COLOURS, "fear no--," no enemy (quibble).

COLSTAFF, cowlstaff, pole for carrying a cowl=tub.

COME ABOUT, charge, turn round.

COMFORTABLE BREAD, spiced gingerbread.

COMING, forward, ready to respond, complaisant.

COMMENT, commentary; "sometime it is taken for a lie
or fayned tale" (Bullokar, 1616).

COMMODITY, "current for--," allusion to practice of
money-lenders, who forced the borrower to take part of
the loan in the shape of worthless goods on which the
latter had to make money if he could.

COMMUNICATE, share.

COMPASS, "in--," within the range, sphere.

COMPLEMENT, completion, completement; anything
required for the perfecting or carrying out of
a person or affair; accomplishment.

COMPLEXION, natural disposition, constitution.

COMPLIMENT, See Complement.

COMPLIMENTARIES, masters of accomplishments.

COMPOSITION, constitution; agreement, contract.

COMPOSURE, composition.

COMPTER, COUNTER, debtors' prison.

CONCEALMENT, a certain amount of church property
had been retained at the dissolution of the monasteries;
Elizabeth sent commissioners to search it out, and the
courtiers begged for it.

CONCEIT, idea, fancy, witty invention, conception, opinion.

CONCEIT, apprehend.

CONCEITED, fancifully, ingeniously devised or conceived;
possessed of intelligence, witty, ingenious (hence well
conceited, etc.); disposed to joke; of opinion, possessed
of an idea.

CONCEIVE, understand.

CONCENT, harmony, agreement.

CONCLUDE, infer, prove.

CONCOCT, assimilate, digest.

CONDEN'T, probably conducted.

CONDUCT, escort, conductor.

CONEY-CATCH, cheat.

CONFECT, sweetmeat.

CONFER, compare.

CONGIES, bows.

CONNIVE, give a look, wink, of secret intelligence.

CONSORT, company, concert.

CONSTANCY, fidelity, ardour, persistence.

CONSTANT, confirmed, persistent, faithful.

CONSTANTLY, firmly, persistently.

CONTEND, strive.

CONTINENT, holding together.

CONTROL (the point), bear or beat down.

CONVENT, assembly, meeting.

CONVERT, turn (oneself).

CONVEY, transmit from one to another.

CONVINCE, evince, prove; overcome, overpower; convict.

COP, head, top; tuft on head of birds; "a cop" may
have reference to one or other meaning; Gifford and
others interpret as "conical, terminating in a point."

COPE-MAN, chapman.

COPESMATE, companion.

COPY (Lat. copia), abundance, copiousness.

CORN ("powder--"), grain.

COROLLARY, finishing part or touch.

CORSIVE, corrosive.

CORTINE, curtain, (arch.) wall between two towers, etc.

CORYAT, famous for his travels, published as "Coryat's
Crudities."

COSSET, pet lamb, pet.

COSTARD, head.

COSTARD-MONGER, apple-seller, coster-monger.

COSTS, ribs.

COTE, hut.

COTHURNAL, from "cothurnus," a particular boot worn by
actors in Greek tragedy.

COTQUEAN, hussy.

COUNSEL, secret.

COUNTENANCE, means necessary for support; credit, standing.

COUNTER.  See Compter.

COUNTER, pieces of metal or ivory for calculating at play.

COUNTER, "hunt--," follow scent in reverse direction.

COUNTERFEIT, false coin.

COUNTERPANE, one part or counterpart of a deed or indenture.

COUNTERPOINT, opposite, contrary point.

COURT-DISH, a kind of drinking-cup (Halliwell); N.E.D.
quotes from Bp. Goodman's "Court of James I.": "The
king...caused his carver to cut him out a court-dish,
that is, something of every dish, which he sent him as
part of his reversion," but this does not sound like
short allowance or small receptacle.

COURT-DOR, fool.

COURTEAU, curtal, small horse with docked tail.

COURTSHIP, courtliness.

COVETISE, avarice.

COWSHARD, cow dung.

COXCOMB, fool's cap, fool.

COY, shrink; disdain.

COYSTREL, low varlet.

COZEN, cheat.

CRACK, lively young rogue, wag.

CRACK, crack up, boast; come to grief.

CRAMBE, game of crambo, in which the players find
rhymes for a given word.

CRANCH, craunch.

CRANION, spider-like; also fairy appellation for a
fly (Gifford, who refers to lines in Drayton's
"Nimphidia").

CRIMP, game at cards.

CRINCLE, draw back, turn aside.

CRISPED, with curled or waved hair.

CROP, gather, reap.

CROPSHIRE, a kind of herring.  (See N.E.D.)

CROSS, any piece of money, many coins being stamped
with a cross.

CROSS AND PILE, heads and tails.

CROSSLET, crucible.

CROWD, fiddle.

CRUDITIES, undigested matter.

CRUMP, curl up.

CRUSADO, Portuguese gold coin, marked with a cross.

CRY ("he that cried Italian"), "speak in a musical
cadence," intone, or declaim (?); cry up.

CUCKING-STOOL, used for the ducking of scolds, etc.

CUCURBITE, a gourd-shaped vessel used for distillation.

CUERPO, "in--," in undress.

CULLICE, broth.

CULLION, base fellow, coward.

CULLISEN, badge worn on their arm by servants.

CULVERIN, kind of cannon.

CUNNING, skill.

CUNNING, skilful.

CUNNING-MAN, fortune-teller.

CURE, care for.

CURIOUS(LY), scrupulous, particular; elaborate,
elegant(ly), dainty(ly) (hence "in curious").

CURST, shrewish, mischievous.

CURTAL, dog with docked tail, of inferior sort.

CUSTARD, "quaking--," "--politic," reference to
a large custard which formed part of a city feast
and afforded huge entertainment, for the fool jumped
into it, and other like tricks were played.  (See
"All's Well, etc." ii. 5, 40.)

CUTWORK, embroidery, open-work.

CYPRES (CYPRUS) (quibble), cypress (or cyprus) being
a transparent material, and when black used for mourning.

DAGGER ("--frumety"), name of tavern.

DARGISON, apparently some person known in ballad or tale.

DAUPHIN MY BOY, refrain of old comic song.

DAW, daunt.

DEAD LIFT, desperate emergency.

DEAR, applied to that which in any way touches us nearly.

DECLINE, turn off from; turn away, aside.

DEFALK, deduct, abate.

DEFEND, forbid.

DEGENEROUS, degenerate.

DEGREES, steps.

DELATE, accuse.

DEMI-CULVERIN, cannon carrying a ball of about ten pounds.

DENIER, the smallest possible coin, being the twelfth
part of a sou.

DEPART, part with.

DEPENDANCE, ground of quarrel in duello language.

DESERT, reward.

DESIGNMENT, design.

DESPERATE, rash, reckless.

DETECT, allow to be detected, betray, inform against.

DETERMINE, terminate.

DETRACT, draw back, refuse.

DEVICE, masque, show; a thing moved by wires,
etc., puppet.

DEVISE, exact in every particular.

DEVISED, invented.

DIAPASM, powdered aromatic herbs, made into balls
of perfumed paste.  (See Pomander.)

DIBBLE, (?) moustache (N.E.D.); (?) dagger (Cunningham).

DIFFUSED, disordered, scattered, irregular.

DIGHT, dressed.

DILDO, refrain of popular songs; vague term of low meaning.

DIMBLE, dingle, ravine.

DIMENSUM, stated allowance.

DISBASE, debase.

DISCERN, distinguish, show a difference between.

DISCHARGE, settle for.

DISCIPLINE, reformation; ecclesiastical system.

DISCLAIM, renounce all part in.

DISCOURSE, process of reasoning, reasoning faculty.

DISCOURTSHIP, discourtesy.

DISCOVER, betray, reveal; display.

DISFAVOUR, disfigure.

DISPARAGEMENT, legal term applied to the unfitness
in any way of a marriage arranged for in the case
of wards.

DISPENSE WITH, grant dispensation for.

DISPLAY, extend.

DIS'PLE, discipline, teach by the whip.

DISPOSED, inclined to merriment.

DISPOSURE, disposal.

DISPRISE, depreciate.

DISPUNCT, not punctilious.

DISQUISITION, search.

DISSOLVED, enervated by grief.

DISTANCE, (?) proper measure.

DISTASTE, offence, cause of offence.

DISTASTE, render distasteful.

DISTEMPERED, upset, out of humour.

DIVISION (mus.), variation, modulation.

DOG-BOLT, term of contempt.

DOLE, given in dole, charity.

DOLE OF FACES, distribution of grimaces.

DOOM, verdict, sentence.

DOP, dip, low bow.

DOR, beetle, buzzing insect, drone, idler.

DOR, (?) buzz; "give the--," make a fool of.

DOSSER, pannier, basket.

DOTES, endowments, qualities.

DOTTEREL, plover; gull, fool.

DOUBLE, behave deceitfully.

DOXY, wench, mistress.

DRACHM, Greek silver coin.

DRESS, groom, curry.

DRESSING, coiffure.

DRIFT, intention.

DRYFOOT, track by mere scent of foot.

DUCKING, punishment for minor offences.

DUILL, grieve.

DUMPS, melancholy, originally a mournful melody.

DURINDANA, Orlando's sword.

DWINDLE, shrink away, be overawed.

EAN, yean, bring forth young.

EASINESS, readiness.

EBOLITION, ebullition.

EDGE, sword.

EECH, eke.

EGREGIOUS, eminently excellent.

EKE, also, moreover.

E-LA, highest note in the scale.

EGGS ON THE SPIT, important business on hand.

ELF-LOCK, tangled hair, supposed to be the work of elves.

EMMET, ant.

ENGAGE, involve.

ENGHLE.  See Ingle.

ENGHLE, cajole; fondle.

ENGIN(E), device, contrivance; agent; ingenuity, wit.

ENGINER, engineer, deviser, plotter.

ENGINOUS, crafty, full of devices; witty, ingenious.

ENGROSS, monopolise.

ENS, an existing thing, a substance.

ENSIGNS, tokens, wounds.

ENSURE, assure.

ENTERTAIN, take into service.

ENTREAT, plead.

ENTREATY, entertainment.

ENTRY, place where a deer has lately passed.

ENVOY, denouement, conclusion.

ENVY, spite, calumny, dislike, odium.

EPHEMERIDES, calendars.

EQUAL, just, impartial.

ERECTION, elevation in esteem.

ERINGO, candied root of the sea-holly, formerly
used as a sweetmeat and aphrodisiac.

ERRANT, arrant.

ESSENTIATE, become assimilated.

ESTIMATION, esteem.

ESTRICH, ostrich.

ETHNIC, heathen.

EURIPUS, flux and reflux.

EVEN, just equable.

EVENT, fate, issue.

EVENT(ED), issue(d).

EVERT, overturn.

EXACUATE, sharpen.

EXAMPLESS, without example or parallel.

EXCALIBUR, King Arthur's sword.

EXEMPLIFY, make an example of.

EXEMPT, separate, exclude.

EXEQUIES, obsequies.

EXHALE, drag out.

EXHIBITION, allowance for keep, pocket-money.

EXORBITANT, exceeding limits of propriety or law,
inordinate.

EXORNATION, ornament.

EXPECT, wait.

EXPIATE, terminate.

EXPLICATE, explain, unfold.

EXTEMPORAL, extempore, unpremeditated.

EXTRACTION, essence.

EXTRAORDINARY, employed for a special or temporary purpose.

EXTRUDE, expel.

EYE, "in--," in view.

EYEBRIGHT, (?) a malt liquor in which the herb of
this name was infused, or a person who sold the same
(Gifford).

EYE-TINGE, least shade or gleam.

FACE, appearance.

FACES ABOUT, military word of command.

FACINOROUS, extremely wicked.

FACKINGS, faith.

FACT, deed, act, crime.

FACTIOUS, seditious, belonging to a party, given to party feeling.

FAECES, dregs.

FAGIOLI, French beans.

FAIN, forced, necessitated.

FAITHFUL, believing.

FALL, ruff or band turned back on the shoulders; or, veil.

FALSIFY, feign (fencing term).

FAME, report.

FAMILIAR, attendant spirit.

FANTASTICAL, capricious, whimsical.

FARCE, stuff.

FAR-FET.  See Fet.

FARTHINGAL, hooped petticoat.

FAUCET, tapster.

FAULT, lack; loss, break in line of scent; "for--," in default of.

FAUTOR, partisan.

FAYLES, old table game similar to backgammon.

FEAR(ED), affright(ed).

FEAT, activity, operation; deed, action.

FEAT, elegant, trim.

FEE, "in--" by feudal obligation.

FEIZE, beat, belabour.

FELLOW, term of contempt.

FENNEL, emblem of flattery.

FERE, companion, fellow.

FERN-SEED, supposed to have power of rendering invisible.

FET, fetched.

FETCH, trick.

FEUTERER (Fr. vautrier), dog-keeper.

FEWMETS, dung.

FICO, fig.

FIGGUM, (?) jugglery.

FIGMENT, fiction, invention.

FIRK, frisk, move suddenly, or in jerks; "--up,"
stir up, rouse; "firks mad," suddenly behaves like
a madman.

FIT, pay one out, punish.

FITNESS, readiness.

FITTON (FITTEN), lie, invention.

FIVE-AND-FIFTY, "highest number to stand on at
primero" (Gifford).

FLAG, to fly low and waveringly.

FLAGON CHAIN, for hanging a smelling-bottle (Fr.
flacon) round the neck (?).  (See N.E.D.).

FLAP-DRAGON, game similar to snap-dragon.

FLASKET, some kind of basket.

FLAW, sudden gust or squall of wind.

FLAWN, custard.

FLEA, catch fleas.

FLEER, sneer, laugh derisively.

FLESH, feed a hawk or dog with flesh to incite
it to the chase; initiate in blood-shed; satiate.

FLICKER-MOUSE, bat.

FLIGHT, light arrow.

FLITTER-MOUSE, bat.

FLOUT, mock, speak and act contemptuously.

FLOWERS, pulverised substance.

FLY, familiar spirit.

FOIL, weapon used in fencing; that which
sets anything off to advantage.

FOIST, cut-purse, sharper.

FOND(LY), foolish(ly).

FOOT-CLOTH, housings of ornamental cloth which
hung down on either side a horse to the ground.

FOOTING, foothold; footstep; dancing.

FOPPERY, foolery.

FOR, "--failing," for fear of failing.

FORBEAR, bear with; abstain from.

FORCE, "hunt at--," run the game down with dogs.

FOREHEAD, modesty; face, assurance, effrontery.

FORESLOW, delay.

FORESPEAK, bewitch; foretell.

FORETOP, front lock of hair which fashion
required to be worn upright.

FORGED, fabricated.

FORM, state formally.

FORMAL, shapely; normal; conventional.

FORTHCOMING, produced when required.

FOUNDER, disable with over-riding.

FOURM, form, lair.

FOX, sword.

FRAIL, rush basket in which figs or raisins
were packed.

FRAMPULL, peevish, sour-tempered.

FRAPLER, blusterer, wrangler.

FRAYING, "a stag is said to fray his head when he
rubs it against a tree to...cause the outward coat
of the new horns to fall off" (Gifford).

FREIGHT (of the gazetti), burden (of the newspapers).

FREQUENT, full.

FRICACE, rubbing.

FRICATRICE, woman of low character.

FRIPPERY, old clothes shop.

FROCK, smock-frock.

FROLICS, (?) humorous verses circulated at a feast
(N.E.D.); couplets wrapped round sweetmeats (Cunningham).

FRONTLESS, shameless.

FROTED, rubbed.

FRUMETY, hulled wheat boiled in milk and spiced.

FRUMP, flout, sneer.

FUCUS, dye.

FUGEAND, (?) figent: fidgety, restless (N.E.D.).

FULLAM, false dice.

FULMART, polecat.

FULSOME, foul, offensive.

FURIBUND, raging, furious.

GALLEY-FOIST, city-barge, used on Lord Mayor's Day,
when he was sworn into his office at Westminster
(Whalley).

GALLIARD, lively dance in triple time.

GAPE, be eager after.

GARAGANTUA, Rabelais' giant.

GARB, sheaf (Fr. gerbe); manner, fashion, behaviour.

GARD, guard, trimming, gold or silver lace, or other
ornament.

GARDED, faced or trimmed.

GARNISH, fee.

GAVEL-KIND, name of a land-tenure existing chiefly in
Kent; from 16th century often used to denote custom
of dividing a deceased man's property equally among
his sons (N.E.D.).

GAZETTE, small Venetian coin worth about three-farthings.

GEANCE, jaunt, errand.

GEAR (GEER), stuff, matter, affair.

GELID, frozen.

GEMONIES, steps from which the bodies of criminals
were thrown into the river.

GENERAL, free, affable.

GENIUS, attendant spirit.

GENTRY, gentlemen; manners characteristic of gentry,
good breeding.

GIB-CAT, tom-cat.

GIGANTOMACHIZE, start a giants' war.

GIGLOT, wanton.

GIMBLET, gimlet.

GING, gang.

GLASS ("taking in of shadows, etc."), crystal or beryl.

GLEEK, card game played by three; party of three, trio;
side glance.

GLICK (GLEEK), jest, gibe.

GLIDDER, glaze.

GLORIOUSLY, of vain glory.

GODWIT, bird of the snipe family.

GOLD-END-MAN, a buyer of broken gold and silver.

GOLL, hand.

GONFALIONIER, standard-bearer, chief magistrate, etc.

GOOD, sound in credit.

GOOD-YEAR, good luck.

GOOSE-TURD, colour of.  (See Turd).

GORCROW, carrion crow.

GORGET, neck armour.

GOSSIP, godfather.

GOWKED, from "gowk," to stand staring and gaping like
a fool.

GRANNAM, grandam.

GRASS, (?) grease, fat.

GRATEFUL, agreeable, welcome.

GRATIFY, give thanks to.

GRATITUDE, gratuity.

GRATULATE, welcome, congratulate.

GRAVITY, dignity.

GRAY, badger.

GRICE, cub.

GRIEF, grievance.

GRIPE, vulture, griffin.

GRIPE'S EGG, vessel in shape of.

GROAT, fourpence.

GROGRAN, coarse stuff made of silk and mohair, or of
coarse silk.

GROOM-PORTER, officer in the royal household.

GROPE, handle, probe.

GROUND, pit (hence "grounded judgments").

GUARD, caution, heed.

GUARDANT, heraldic term: turning the head only.

GUILDER, Dutch coin worth about 4d.

GULES, gullet, throat; heraldic term for red.

GULL, simpleton, dupe.

GUST, taste.

HAB NAB, by, on, chance.

HABERGEON, coat of mail.

HAGGARD, wild female hawk; hence coy, wild.

HALBERD, combination of lance and battle-axe.

HALL, "a--!" a cry to clear the room for the dancers.

HANDSEL, first money taken.

HANGER, loop or strap on a sword-belt from which the
sword was suspended.

HAP, fortune, luck.

HAPPILY, haply.

HAPPINESS, appropriateness, fitness.

HAPPY, rich.

HARBOUR, track, trace (an animal) to its shelter.

HARD-FAVOURED, harsh-featured.

HARPOCRATES, Horus the child, son of Osiris, figured
with a finger pointing to his mouth, indicative of
silence.

HARRINGTON, a patent was granted to Lord H. for the
coinage of tokens (q.v.).

HARROT, herald.

HARRY NICHOLAS, founder of a community called the
"Family of Love."

HAY, net for catching rabbits, etc.

HAY! (Ital. hai!), you have it (a fencing term).

HAY IN HIS HORN, ill-tempered person.

HAZARD, game at dice; that which is staked.

HEAD, "first--," young deer with antlers first
sprouting; fig. a newly-ennobled man.

HEADBOROUGH, constable.

HEARKEN AFTER, inquire; "hearken out," find, search out.

HEARTEN, encourage.

HEAVEN AND HELL ("Alchemist"), names of taverns.

HECTIC, fever.

HEDGE IN, include.

HELM, upper part of a retort.

HER'NSEW, hernshaw, heron.

HIERONIMO (JERONIMO), hero of Kyd's "Spanish Tragedy."

HOBBY, nag.

HOBBY-HORSE, imitation horse of some light material,
fastened round the waist of the morrice-dancer, who
imitated the movements of a skittish horse.

HODDY-DODDY, fool.

HOIDEN, hoyden, formerly applied to both sexes (ancient
term for leveret?  Gifford).

HOLLAND, name of two famous chemists.

HONE AND HONERO, wailing expressions of lament or discontent.

HOOD-WINK'D, blindfolded.

HORARY, hourly.

HORN-MAD, stark mad (quibble).

HORN-THUMB, cut-purses were in the habit of wearing a horn
shield on the thumb.

HORSE-BREAD-EATING, horses were often fed on coarse bread.

HORSE-COURSER, horse-dealer.

HOSPITAL, Christ's Hospital.

HOWLEGLAS, Eulenspiegel, the hero of a popular German
tale which relates his buffooneries and knavish tricks.

HUFF, hectoring, arrogance.

HUFF IT, swagger.

HUISHER (Fr. huissier), usher.

HUM, beer and spirits mixed together.

HUMANITIAN, humanist, scholar.

HUMOROUS, capricious, moody, out of humour; moist.

HUMOUR, a word used in and out of season in the time
of Shakespeare and Ben Jonson, and ridiculed by both.

HUMOURS, manners.

HUMPHREY, DUKE, those who were dinnerless spent the
dinner-hour in a part of St. Paul's where stood a
monument said to be that of the duke's; hence "dine
with Duke Humphrey," to go hungry.

HURTLESS, harmless.

IDLE, useless, unprofitable.

ILL-AFFECTED, ill-disposed.

ILL-HABITED, unhealthy.

ILLUSTRATE, illuminate.

IMBIBITION, saturation, steeping.

IMBROCATA, fencing term: a thrust in tierce.

IMPAIR, impairment.

IMPART, give money.

IMPARTER, any one ready to be cheated and to part
with his money.

IMPEACH, damage.

IMPERTINENCIES, irrelevancies.

IMPERTINENT(LY), irrelevant(ly), without reason or purpose.

IMPOSITION, duty imposed by.

IMPOTENTLY, beyond power of control.

IMPRESS, money in advance.

IMPULSION, incitement.

IN AND IN, a game played by two or three persons
with four dice.

INCENSE, incite, stir up.

INCERATION, act of covering with wax; or reducing
a substance to softness of wax.

INCH, "to their--es," according to their stature,
capabilities.

INCH-PIN, sweet-bread.

INCONVENIENCE, inconsistency, absurdity.

INCONY, delicate, rare (used as a term of affection).

INCUBEE, incubus.

INCUBUS, evil spirit that oppresses us in sleep, nightmare.

INCURIOUS, unfastidious, uncritical.

INDENT, enter into engagement.

INDIFFERENT, tolerable, passable.

INDIGESTED, shapeless, chaotic.

INDUCE, introduce.

INDUE, supply.

INEXORABLE, relentless.

INFANTED, born, produced.

INFLAME, augment charge.

INGENIOUS, used indiscriminantly for ingenuous;
intelligent, talented.

INGENUITY, ingenuousness.

INGENUOUS, generous.

INGINE.  See Engin.

INGINER, engineer.  (See Enginer).

INGLE, OR ENGHLE, bosom friend, intimate, minion.

INHABITABLE, uninhabitable.

INJURY, insult, affront.

IN-MATE, resident, indwelling.

INNATE, natural.

INNOCENT, simpleton.

INQUEST, jury, or other official body of inquiry.

INQUISITION, inquiry.

INSTANT, immediate.

INSTRUMENT, legal document.

INSURE, assure.

INTEGRATE, complete, perfect.

INTELLIGENCE, secret information, news.

INTEND, note carefully, attend, give ear to, be
occupied with.

INTENDMENT, intention.

INTENT, intention, wish.

INTENTION, concentration of attention or gaze.

INTENTIVE, attentive.

INTERESSED, implicated.

INTRUDE, bring in forcibly or without leave.

INVINCIBLY, invisibly.

INWARD, intimate.

IRPE (uncertain), "a fantastic grimace, or contortion
of the body: (Gifford)."

JACK, Jack o' the clock, automaton figure that strikes
the hour; Jack-a-lent, puppet thrown at in Lent.

JACK, key of a virginal.

JACOB'S STAFF, an instrument for taking altitudes and
distances.

JADE, befool.

JEALOUSY, JEALOUS, suspicion, suspicious.

JERKING, lashing.

JEW'S TRUMP, Jew's harp.

JIG, merry ballad or tune; a fanciful dialogue or
light comic act introduced at the end or during an
interlude of a play.

JOINED (JOINT)-STOOL, folding stool.

JOLL, jowl.

JOLTHEAD, blockhead.

JUMP, agree, tally.

JUST YEAR, no one was capable of the consulship until
he was forty-three.

KELL, cocoon.

KELLY, an alchemist.

KEMB, comb.

KEMIA, vessel for distillation.

KIBE, chap, sore.

KILDERKIN, small barrel.

KILL, kiln.

KIND, nature; species; "do one's--," act according
to one's nature.

KIRTLE, woman's gown of jacket and petticoat.

KISS OR DRINK AFORE ME, "this is a familiar expression,
employed when what the speaker is just about to say is
anticipated by another" (Gifford).

KIT, fiddle.

KNACK, snap, click.

KNIPPER-DOLING, a well-known Anabaptist.

KNITTING CUP, marriage cup.

KNOCKING, striking, weighty.

KNOT, company, band; a sandpiper or robin snipe (Tringa
canutus); flower-bed laid out in fanciful design.

KURSINED, KYRSIN, christened.

LABOURED, wrought with labour and care.

LADE, load(ed).

LADING, load.

LAID, plotted.

LANCE-KNIGHT (Lanzknecht), a German mercenary foot-soldier.

LAP, fold.

LAR, household god.

LARD, garnish.

LARGE, abundant.

LARUM, alarum, call to arms.

LATTICE, tavern windows were furnished with lattices of
various colours.

LAUNDER, to wash gold in aqua regia, so as imperceptibly
to extract some of it.

LAVE, ladle, bale.

LAW, "give--," give a start (term of chase).

LAXATIVE, loose.

LAY ABOARD, run alongside generally with intent to board.

LEAGUER, siege, or camp of besieging army.

LEASING, lying.

LEAVE, leave off, desist.

LEER, leering or "empty, hence, perhaps, leer horse,
a horse without a rider; leer is an adjective meaning
uncontrolled, hence 'leer drunkards'" (Halliwell);
according to Nares, a leer (empty) horse meant also a
led horse; leeward, left.

LEESE, lose.

LEGS, "make--," do obeisance.

LEIGER, resident representative.

LEIGERITY, legerdemain.

LEMMA, subject proposed, or title of the epigram.

LENTER, slower.

LET, hinder.

LET, hindrance.

LEVEL COIL, a rough game...in which one hunted
another from his seat.  Hence used for any noisy
riot (Halliwell).

LEWD, ignorant.

LEYSTALLS, receptacles of filth.

LIBERAL, ample.

LIEGER, ledger, register.

LIFT(ING), steal(ing); theft.

LIGHT, alight.

LIGHTLY, commonly, usually, often.

LIKE, please.

LIKELY, agreeable, pleasing.

LIME-HOUND, leash-, blood-hound.

LIMMER, vile, worthless.

LIN, leave off.

Line, "by--," by rule.

LINSTOCK, staff to stick in the ground, with forked
head to hold a lighted match for firing cannon.

LIQUID, clear.

LIST, listen, hark; like, please.

LIVERY, legal term, delivery of the possession, etc.

LOGGET, small log, stick.

LOOSE, solution; upshot, issue; release of an arrow.

LOSE, give over, desist from; waste.

LOUTING, bowing, cringing.

LUCULENT, bright of beauty.

LUDGATHIANS, dealers on Ludgate Hill.

LURCH, rob, cheat.

LUTE, to close a vessel with some kind of cement.

MACK, unmeaning expletive.

MADGE-HOWLET or OWL, barn-owl.

MAIM, hurt, injury.

MAIN, chief concern (used as a quibble on heraldic
term for "hand").

MAINPRISE, becoming surety for a prisoner so as to
procure his release.

MAINTENANCE, giving aid, or abetting.

MAKE, mate.

MAKE, MADE, acquaint with business, prepare(d), instruct(ed).

MALLANDERS, disease of horses.

MALT HORSE, dray horse.

MAMMET, puppet.

MAMMOTHREPT, spoiled child.

MANAGE, control (term used for breaking-in horses);
handling, administration.

MANGO, slave-dealer.

MANGONISE, polish up for sale.

MANIPLES, bundles, handfuls.

MANKIND, masculine, like a virago.

MANKIND, humanity.

MAPLE FACE, spotted face (N.E.D.).

MARCHPANE, a confection of almonds, sugar, etc.

MARK, "fly to the--," "generally said of a goshawk
when, having 'put in' a covey of partridges, she takes
stand, marking the spot where they disappeared from
view until the falconer arrives to put them out to her"
(Harting, Bibl. Accip. Gloss. 226).

MARLE, marvel.

MARROW-BONE MAN, one often on his knees for prayer.

MARRY! exclamation derived from the Virgin's name.

MARRY GIP, "probably originated from By Mary Gipcy" =
St. Mary of Egypt, (N.E.D.).

MARTAGAN, Turk's cap lily.

MARYHINCHCO, stringhalt.

MASORETH, Masora, correct form of the scriptural text
according to Hebrew tradition.

MASS, abb. for master.

MAUND, beg.

MAUTHER, girl, maid.

MEAN, moderation.

MEASURE, dance, more especially a stately one.

MEAT, "carry--in one's mouth," be a source of money
or entertainment.

MEATH, metheglin.

MECHANICAL, belonging to mechanics, mean, vulgar.

MEDITERRANEO, middle aisle of St. Paul's, a general
resort for business and amusement.

MEET WITH, even with.

MELICOTTON, a late kind of peach.

MENSTRUE, solvent.

MERCAT, market.

MERD, excrement.

MERE, undiluted; absolute, unmitigated.

MESS, party of four.

METHEGLIN, fermented liquor, of which one ingredient
was honey.

METOPOSCOPY, study of physiognomy.

MIDDLING GOSSIP, go-between.

MIGNIARD, dainty, delicate.

MILE-END, training-ground of the city.

MINE-MEN, sappers.

MINION, form of cannon.

MINSITIVE, (?) mincing, affected (N.E.D.).

MISCELLANY MADAM, "a female trader in miscellaneous
articles; a dealer in trinkets or ornaments of various
kinds, such as kept shops in the New Exchange" (Nares).

MISCELLINE, mixed grain; medley.

MISCONCEIT, misconception.

MISPRISE, MISPRISION, mistake, misunderstanding.

MISTAKE AWAY, carry away as if by mistake.

MITHRIDATE, an antidote against poison.

MOCCINIGO, small Venetian coin, worth about ninepence.

MODERN, in the mode; ordinary, commonplace.

MOMENT, force or influence of value.

MONTANTO, upward stroke.

MONTH'S MIND, violent desire.

MOORISH, like a moor or waste.

MORGLAY, sword of Bevis of Southampton.

MORRICE-DANCE, dance on May Day, etc., in which
certain personages were represented.

MORTALITY, death.

MORT-MAL, old sore, gangrene.

MOSCADINO, confection flavoured with musk.

MOTHER, Hysterica passio.

MOTION, proposal, request; puppet, puppet-show;
"one of the small figures on the face of a large
clock which was moved by the vibration of the
pendulum" (Whalley).

MOTION, suggest, propose.

MOTLEY, parti-coloured dress of a fool; hence
used to signify pertaining to, or like, a fool.

MOTTE, motto.

MOURNIVAL, set of four aces or court cards in a hand;
a quartette.

MOW, setord hay or sheaves of grain.

MUCH! expressive of irony and incredulity.

MUCKINDER, handkerchief.

MULE, "born to ride on--," judges or serjeants-at-law
formerly rode on mules when going in state to Westminster
(Whally).

MULLETS, small pincers.

MUM-CHANCE, game of chance, played in silence.

MUN, must.

MUREY, dark crimson red.

MUSCOVY-GLASS, mica.

MUSE, wonder.

MUSICAL, in harmony.

MUSS, mouse; scramble.

MYROBOLANE, foreign conserve, "a dried plum, brought
from the Indies."

MYSTERY, art, trade, profession.

NAIL, "to the--" (ad unguem), to perfection, to the
very utmost.

NATIVE, natural.

NEAT, cattle.

NEAT, smartly apparelled; unmixed; dainty.

NEATLY, neatly finished.

NEATNESS, elegance.

NEIS, nose, scent.

NEUF (NEAF, NEIF), fist.

NEUFT, newt.

NIAISE, foolish, inexperienced person.

NICE, fastidious, trivial, finical, scrupulous.

NICENESS, fastidiousness.

NICK, exact amount; right moment; "set in the--,"
meaning uncertain.

NICE, suit, fit; hit, seize the right moment, etc.,
exactly hit on, hit off.

NOBLE, gold coin worth 6s. 8d.

NOCENT, harmful.

NIL, not will.

NOISE, company of musicians.

NOMENTACK, an Indian chief from Virginia.

NONES, nonce.

NOTABLE, egregious.

NOTE, sign, token.

NOUGHT, "be--," go to the devil, be hanged, etc.

NOWT-HEAD, blockhead.

NUMBER, rhythm.

NUPSON, oaf, simpleton.

OADE, woad.

OBARNI, preparation of mead.

OBJECT, oppose; expose; interpose.

OBLATRANT, barking, railing.

OBNOXIOUS, liable, exposed; offensive.

OBSERVANCE, homage, devoted service.

OBSERVANT, attentive, obsequious.

OBSERVE, show deference, respect.

OBSERVER, one who shows deference, or waits upon another.

OBSTANCY, legal phrase, "juridical opposition."

OBSTREPEROUS, clamorous, vociferous.

OBSTUPEFACT, stupefied.

ODLING, (?) "must have some relation to tricking and
cheating" (Nares).

OMINOUS, deadly, fatal.

ONCE, at once; for good and all; used also for additional
emphasis.

ONLY, pre-eminent, special.

OPEN, make public; expound.

OPPILATION, obstruction.

OPPONE, oppose.

OPPOSITE, antagonist.

OPPRESS, suppress.

ORIGINOUS, native.

ORT, remnant, scrap.

OUT, "to be--," to have forgotten one's part;
not at one with each other.

OUTCRY, sale by auction.

OUTRECUIDANCE, arrogance, presumption.

OUTSPEAK, speak more than.

OVERPARTED, given too difficult a part to play.

OWLSPIEGEL.  See Howleglass.

OYEZ!  (O YES!), hear ye! call of the public crier
when about to make a proclamation.

PACKING PENNY, "give a--," dismiss, send packing.

PAD, highway.

PAD-HORSE, road-horse.

PAINED (PANED) SLOPS, full breeches made of strips
of different colour and material.

PAINFUL, diligent, painstaking.

PAINT, blush.

PALINODE, ode of recantation.

PALL, weaken, dim, make stale.

PALM, triumph.

PAN, skirt of dress or coat.

PANNEL, pad, or rough kind of saddle.

PANNIER-ALLY, inhabited by tripe-sellers.

PANNIER-MAN, hawker; a man employed about the inns of
court to bring in provisions, set the table, etc.

PANTOFLE, indoor shoe, slipper.

PARAMENTOS, fine trappings.

PARANOMASIE, a play upon words.

PARANTORY, (?) peremptory.

PARCEL, particle, fragment (used contemptuously); article.

PARCEL, part, partly.

PARCEL-POET, poetaster.

PARERGA, subordinate matters.

PARGET, to paint or plaster the face.

PARLE, parley.

PARLOUS, clever, shrewd.

PART, apportion.

PARTAKE, participate in.

PARTED, endowed, talented.

PARTICULAR, individual person.

PARTIZAN, kind of halberd.

PARTRICH, partridge.

PARTS, qualities, endowments.

PASH, dash, smash.

PASS, care, trouble oneself.

PASSADO, fencing term: a thrust.

PASSAGE, game at dice.

PASSINGLY, exceedingly.

PASSION, effect caused by external agency.

PASSION, "in--," in so melancholy a tone, so pathetically.

PATOUN, (?) Fr. Paton, pellet of dough; perhaps the
"moulding of the tobacco...for the pipe" (Gifford); (?)
variant of Petun, South American name of tobacco.

PATRICO, the recorder, priest, orator of strolling
beggars or gipsies.

PATTEN, shoe with wooden sole; "go--," keep step with,
accompany.

PAUCA VERBA, few words.

PAVIN, a stately dance.

PEACE, "with my master's--," by leave, favour.

PECULIAR, individual, single.

PEDANT, teacher of the languages.

PEEL, baker's shovel.

PEEP, speak in a small or shrill voice.

PEEVISH(LY), foolish(ly), capricious(ly); childish(ly).

PELICAN, a retort fitted with tube or tubes, for
continuous distillation.

PENCIL, small tuft of hair.

PERDUE, soldier accustomed to hazardous service.

PEREMPTORY, resolute, bold; imperious; thorough, utter,
absolute(ly).

PERIMETER, circumference of a figure.

PERIOD, limit, end.

PERK, perk up.

PERPETUANA, "this seems to be that glossy kind of stuff
now called everlasting, and anciently worn by serjeants
and other city officers" (Gifford).

PERSPECTIVE, a view, scene or scenery; an optical device
which gave a distortion to the picture unless seen from a
particular point; a relief, modelled to produce an
optical illusion.

PERSPICIL, optic glass.

PERSTRINGE, criticise, censure.

PERSUADE, inculcate, commend.

PERSWAY, mitigate.

PERTINACY, pertinacity.

PESTLING, pounding, pulverising, like a pestle.

PETASUS, broad-brimmed hat or winged cap worn by Mercury.

PETITIONARY, supplicatory.

PETRONEL, a kind of carbine or light gun carried by horsemen.

PETULANT, pert, insolent.

PHERE.  See Fere.

PHLEGMA, watery distilled liquor (old chem. "water").

PHRENETIC, madman.

PICARDIL, stiff upright collar fastened on to the coat
(Whalley).

PICT-HATCH, disreputable quarter of London.

PIECE, person, used for woman or girl; a gold coin
worth in Jonson's time 20s. or 22s.

PIECES OF EIGHT, Spanish coin: piastre equal to eight
reals.

PIED, variegated.

PIE-POUDRES (Fr. pied-poudreux, dusty-foot), court held
at fairs to administer justice to itinerant vendors and
buyers.

PILCHER, term of contempt; one who wore a buff or leather
jerkin, as did the serjeants of the counter; a pilferer.

PILED, pilled, peeled, bald.

PILL'D, polled, fleeced.

PIMLICO, "sometimes spoken of as a person--perhaps
master of a house famous for a particular ale" (Gifford).

PINE, afflict, distress.

PINK, stab with a weapon; pierce or cut in scallops for
ornament.

PINNACE, a go-between in infamous sense.

PISMIRE, ant.

PISTOLET, gold coin, worth about 6s.

PITCH, height of a bird of prey's flight.

PLAGUE, punishment, torment.

PLAIN, lament.

PLAIN SONG, simple melody.

PLAISE, plaice.

PLANET, "struck with a--," planets were supposed to
have powers of blasting or exercising secret influences.

PLAUSIBLE, pleasing.

PLAUSIBLY, approvingly.

PLOT, plan.

PLY, apply oneself to.

POESIE, posy, motto inside a ring.

POINT IN HIS DEVICE, exact in every particular.

POINTS, tagged laces or cords for fastening the breeches
to the doublet.

POINT-TRUSSER, one who trussed (tied) his master's
points (q.v.).

POISE, weigh, balance.

POKING-STICK, stick used for setting the plaits of ruffs.

POLITIC, politician.

POLITIC, judicious, prudent, political.

POLITICIAN, plotter, intriguer.

POLL, strip, plunder, gain by extortion.

POMANDER, ball of perfume, worn or hung about the
person to prevent infection, or for foppery.

POMMADO, vaulting on a horse without the aid of stirrups.

PONTIC, sour.

POPULAR, vulgar, of the populace.

POPULOUS, numerous.

PORT, gate; print of a deer's foot.

PORT, transport.

PORTAGUE, Portuguese gold coin, worth over 3 or 4
pounds.

PORTCULLIS, "--of coin," some old coins have a
portcullis stamped on their reverse (Whalley).

PORTENT, marvel, prodigy; sinister omen.

PORTENTOUS, prophesying evil, threatening.

PORTER, references appear "to allude to Parsons, the king's
porter, who was...near seven feet high" (Whalley).

POSSESS, inform, acquaint.

POST AND PAIR, a game at cards.

POSY, motto.  (See Poesie).

POTCH, poach.

POULT-FOOT, club-foot.

POUNCE, claw, talon.

PRACTICE, intrigue, concerted plot.

PRACTISE, plot, conspire.

PRAGMATIC, an expert, agent.

PRAGMATIC, officious, conceited, meddling.

PRECEDENT, record of proceedings.

PRECEPT, warrant, summons.

PRECISIAN(ISM), Puritan(ism), preciseness.

PREFER, recommend.

PRESENCE, presence chamber.

PRESENT(LY), immediate(ly), without delay; at the
present time; actually.

PRESS, force into service.

PREST, ready.

PRETEND, assert, allege.

PREVENT, anticipate.

PRICE, worth, excellence.

PRICK, point, dot used in the writing of Hebrew and
other languages.

PRICK, prick out, mark off, select; trace, track;
"--away," make off with speed.

PRIMERO, game of cards.

PRINCOX, pert boy.

PRINT, "in--," to the letter, exactly.

PRISTINATE, former.

PRIVATE, private interests.

PRIVATE, privy, intimate.

PROCLIVE, prone to.

PRODIGIOUS, monstrous, unnatural.

PRODIGY, monster.

PRODUCED, prolonged.

PROFESS, pretend.

PROJECTION, the throwing of the "powder of projection"
into the crucible to turn the melted metal into gold or
silver.

PROLATE, pronounce drawlingly.

PROPER, of good appearance, handsome; own, particular.

PROPERTIES, stage necessaries.

PROPERTY, duty; tool.

PRORUMPED, burst out.

PROTEST, vow, proclaim (an affected word of that time);
formally declare non-payment, etc., of bill of exchange;
fig. failure of personal credit, etc.

PROVANT, soldier's allowance--hence, of common make.

PROVIDE, foresee.

PROVIDENCE, foresight, prudence.

PUBLICATION, making a thing public of common property (N.E.D.).

PUCKFIST, puff-ball; insipid, insignificant, boasting fellow.

PUFF-WING, shoulder puff.

PUISNE, judge of inferior rank, a junior.

PULCHRITUDE, beauty.

PUMP, shoe.

PUNGENT, piercing.

PUNTO, point, hit.

PURCEPT, precept, warrant.

PURE, fine, capital, excellent.

PURELY, perfectly, utterly.

PURL, pleat or fold of a ruff.

PURSE-NET, net of which the mouth is drawn together
with a string.

PURSUIVANT, state messenger who summoned the persecuted
seminaries; warrant officer.

PURSY, PURSINESS, shortwinded(ness).

PUT, make a push, exert yourself (N.E.D.).

PUT OFF, excuse, shift.

PUT ON, incite, encourage; proceed with, take in hand, try.

QUACKSALVER, quack.

QUAINT, elegant, elaborated, ingenious, clever.

QUAR, quarry.

QUARRIED, seized, or fed upon, as prey.

QUEAN, hussy, jade.

QUEASY, hazardous, delicate.

QUELL, kill, destroy.

QUEST, request; inquiry.

QUESTION, decision by force of arms.

QUESTMAN, one appointed to make official inquiry.

QUIB, QUIBLIN, quibble, quip.

QUICK, the living.

QUIDDIT, quiddity, legal subtlety.

QUIRK, clever turn or trick.

QUIT, requite, repay; acquit, absolve; rid; forsake,
leave.

QUITTER-BONE, disease of horses.

QUODLING, codling.

QUOIT, throw like a quoit, chuck.

QUOTE, take note, observe, write down.

RACK, neck of mutton or pork (Halliwell).

RAKE UP, cover over.

RAMP, rear, as a lion, etc.

RAPT, carry away.

RAPT, enraptured.

RASCAL, young or inferior deer.

RASH, strike with a glancing oblique blow, as a
boar with its tusk.

RATSEY, GOMALIEL, a famous highwayman.

RAVEN, devour.

REACH, understand.

REAL, regal.

REBATU, ruff, turned-down collar.

RECTOR, RECTRESS, director, governor.

REDARGUE, confute.

REDUCE, bring back.

REED, rede, counsel, advice.

REEL, run riot.

REFEL, refute.

REFORMADOES, disgraced or disbanded soldiers.

REGIMENT, government.

REGRESSION, return.

REGULAR ("Tale of a Tub"), regular noun (quibble) (N.E.D.).

RELIGION, "make--of," make a point of, scruple of.

RELISH, savour.

REMNANT, scrap of quotation.

REMORA, species of fish.

RENDER, depict, exhibit, show.

REPAIR, reinstate.

REPETITION, recital, narration.

REREMOUSE, bat.

RESIANT, resident.

RESIDENCE, sediment.

RESOLUTION, judgment, decision.

RESOLVE, inform; assure; prepare, make up one's mind;
dissolve; come to a decision, be convinced; relax, set
at ease.

RESPECTIVE, worthy of respect; regardful, discriminative.

RESPECTIVELY, with reverence.

RESPECTLESS, regardless.

RESPIRE, exhale; inhale.

RESPONSIBLE, correspondent.

REST, musket-rest.

REST, "set up one's--," venture one's all, one's
last stake (from game of primero).

REST, arrest.

RESTIVE, RESTY, dull, inactive.

RETCHLESS(NESS), reckless(ness).

RETIRE, cause to retire.

RETRICATO, fencing term.

RETRIEVE, rediscovery of game once sprung.

RETURNS, ventures sent abroad, for the safe return of
which so much money is received.

REVERBERATE, dissolve or blend by reflected heat.

REVERSE, REVERSO, back-handed thrust, etc., in fencing.

REVISE, reconsider a sentence.

RHEUM, spleen, caprice.

RIBIBE, abusive term for an old woman.

RID, destroy, do away with.

RIFLING, raffling, dicing.

RING, "cracked within the--," coins so cracked were
unfit for currency.

RISSE, risen, rose.

RIVELLED, wrinkled.

ROARER, swaggerer.

ROCHET, fish of the gurnet kind.

ROCK, distaff.

RODOMONTADO, braggadocio.

ROGUE, vagrant, vagabond.

RONDEL, "a round mark in the score of a public-house"
(Nares); roundel.

ROOK, sharper; fool, dupe.

ROSAKER, similar to ratsbane.

ROSA-SOLIS, a spiced spirituous liquor.

ROSES, rosettes.

ROUND, "gentlemen of the--," officers of inferior rank.

ROUND TRUNKS, trunk hose, short loose breeches reaching
almost or quite to the knees.

ROUSE, carouse, bumper.

ROVER, arrow used for shooting at a random mark at
uncertain distance.

ROWLY-POWLY, roly-poly.

RUDE, RUDENESS, unpolished, rough(ness), coarse(ness).

RUFFLE, flaunt, swagger.

RUG, coarse frieze.

RUG-GOWNS, gown made of rug.

RUSH, reference to rushes with which the floors were
then strewn.

RUSHER, one who strewed the floor with rushes.

RUSSET, homespun cloth of neutral or reddish-brown colour.

SACK, loose, flowing gown.

SADLY, seriously, with gravity.

SAD(NESS), sober, serious(ness).

SAFFI, bailiffs.

ST. THOMAS A WATERINGS, place in Surrey where criminals
were executed.

SAKER, small piece of ordnance.

SALT, leap.

SALT, lascivious.

SAMPSUCHINE, sweet marjoram.

SARABAND, a slow dance.

SATURNALS, began December 17.

SAUCINESS, presumption, insolence.

SAUCY, bold, impudent, wanton.

SAUNA (Lat.), a gesture of contempt.

SAVOUR, perceive; gratify, please; to partake of the nature.

SAY, sample.

SAY, assay, try.

SCALD, word of contempt, implying dirt and disease.

SCALLION, shalot, small onion.

SCANDERBAG, "name which the Turks (in allusion to
Alexander the Great) gave to the brave Castriot, chief
of Albania, with whom they had continual wars.  His
romantic life had just been translated" (Gifford).

SCAPE, escape.

SCARAB, beetle.

SCARTOCCIO, fold of paper, cover, cartouch, cartridge.

SCONCE, head.

SCOPE, aim.

SCOT AND LOT, tax, contribution (formerly a parish
assessment).

SCOTOMY, dizziness in the head.

SCOUR, purge.

SCOURSE, deal, swap.

SCRATCHES, disease of horses.

SCROYLE, mean, rascally fellow.

SCRUPLE, doubt.

SEAL, put hand to the giving up of property or rights.

SEALED, stamped as genuine.

SEAM-RENT, ragged.

SEAMING LACES, insertion or edging.

SEAR UP, close by searing, burning.

SEARCED, sifted.

SECRETARY, able to keep a secret.

SECULAR, worldly, ordinary, commonplace.

SECURE, confident.

SEELIE, happy, blest.

SEISIN, legal term: possession.

SELLARY, lewd person.

SEMBLABLY, similarly.

SEMINARY, a Romish priest educated in a foreign seminary.

SENSELESS, insensible, without sense or feeling.

SENSIBLY, perceptibly.

SENSIVE, sensitive.

SENSUAL, pertaining to the physical or material.

SERENE, harmful dew of evening.

SERICON, red tincture.

SERVANT, lover.

SERVICES, doughty deeds of arms.

SESTERCE, Roman copper coin.

SET, stake, wager.

SET UP, drill.

SETS, deep plaits of the ruff.

SEWER, officer who served up the feast, and brought
water for the hands of the guests.

SHAPE, a suit by way of disguise.

SHIFT, fraud, dodge.

SHIFTER, cheat.

SHITTLE, shuttle; "shittle-cock," shuttlecock.

SHOT, tavern reckoning.

SHOT-CLOG, one only tolerated because he paid the shot
(reckoning) for the rest.

SHOT-FREE, scot-free, not having to pay.

SHOVE-GROAT, low kind of gambling amusement, perhaps
somewhat of the nature of pitch and toss.

SHOT-SHARKS, drawers.

SHREWD, mischievous, malicious, curst.

SHREWDLY, keenly, in a high degree.

SHRIVE, sheriff; posts were set up before his door for
proclamations, or to indicate his residence.

SHROVING, Shrovetide, season of merriment.

SIGILLA, seal, mark.

SILENCED BRETHERN, MINISTERS, those of the Church or
Nonconformists who had been silenced, deprived, etc.

SILLY, simple, harmless.

SIMPLE, silly, witless; plain, true.

SIMPLES, herbs.

SINGLE, term of chase, signifying when the hunted stag
is separated from the herd, or forced to break covert.

SINGLE, weak, silly.

SINGLE-MONEY, small change.

SINGULAR, unique, supreme.

SI-QUIS, bill, advertisement.

SKELDRING, getting money under false pretences; swindling.

SKILL, "it--s not," matters not.

SKINK(ER), pour, draw(er), tapster.

SKIRT, tail.

SLEEK, smooth.

SLICE, fire shovel or pan (dial.).

SLICK, sleek, smooth.

'SLID, 'SLIGHT, 'SPRECIOUS, irreverent oaths.

SLIGHT, sleight, cunning, cleverness; trick.

SLIP, counterfeit coin, bastard.

SLIPPERY, polished and shining.

SLOPS, large loose breeches.

SLOT, print of a stag's foot.

SLUR, put a slur on; cheat (by sliding a die in some way).

SMELT, gull, simpleton.

SNORLE, "perhaps snarl, as Puppy is addressed" (Cunningham).

SNOTTERIE, filth.

SNUFF, anger, resentment; "take in--," take offence at.

SNUFFERS, small open silver dishes for holding snuff,
or receptacle for placing snuffers in (Halliwell).

SOCK, shoe worn by comic actors.

SOD, seethe.

SOGGY, soaked, sodden.

SOIL, "take--," said of a hunted stag when he takes
to the water for safety.

SOL, sou.

SOLDADOES, soldiers.

SOLICIT, rouse, excite to action.

SOOTH, flattery, cajolery.

SOOTHE, flatter, humour.

SOPHISTICATE, adulterate.

SORT, company, party; rank, degree.

SORT, suit, fit; select.

SOUSE, ear.

SOUSED ("Devil is an Ass"), fol. read "sou't," which
Dyce interprets as "a variety of the spelling of "shu'd":
to "shu" is to scare a bird away."  (See his "Webster,"
page 350).

SOWTER, cobbler.

SPAGYRICA, chemistry according to the teachings of Paracelsus.

SPAR, bar.

SPEAK, make known, proclaim.

SPECULATION, power of sight.

SPED, to have fared well, prospered.

SPEECE, species.

SPIGHT, anger, rancour.

SPINNER, spider.

SPINSTRY, lewd person.

SPITTLE, hospital, lazar-house.

SPLEEN, considered the seat of the emotions.

SPLEEN, caprice, humour, mood.

SPRUNT, spruce.

SPURGE, foam.

SPUR-RYAL, gold coin worth 15s.

SQUIRE, square, measure; "by the--," exactly.

STAGGERING, wavering, hesitating.

STAIN, disparagement, disgrace.

STALE, decoy, or cover, stalking-horse.

STALE, make cheap, common.

STALK, approach stealthily or under cover.

STALL, forestall.

STANDARD, suit.

STAPLE, market, emporium.

STARK, downright.

STARTING-HOLES, loopholes of escape.

STATE, dignity; canopied chair of state; estate.

STATUMINATE, support vines by poles or stakes; used
by Pliny (Gifford).

STAY, gag.

STAY, await; detain.

STICKLER, second or umpire.

STIGMATISE, mark, brand.

STILL, continual(ly), constant(ly).

STINKARD, stinking fellow.

STINT, stop.

STIPTIC, astringent.

STOCCATA, thrust in fencing.

STOCK-FISH, salted and dried fish.

STOMACH, pride, valour.

STOMACH, resent.

STOOP, swoop down as a hawk.

STOP, fill, stuff.

STOPPLE, stopper.

STOTE, stoat, weasel.

STOUP, stoop, swoop=bow.

STRAIGHT, straightway.

STRAMAZOUN (Ital. stramazzone), a down blow, as opposed
to the thrust.

STRANGE, like a stranger, unfamiliar.

STRANGENESS, distance of behaviour.

STREIGHTS, OR BERMUDAS, labyrinth of alleys and courts
in the Strand.

STRIGONIUM, Grau in Hungary, taken from the Turks in
1597.

STRIKE, balance (accounts).

STRINGHALT, disease of horses.

STROKER, smoother, flatterer.

STROOK, p.p. of "strike."

STRUMMEL-PATCHED, strummel is glossed in dialect dicts.
as "a long, loose and dishevelled head of hair."

STUDIES, studious efforts.

STYLE, title; pointed instrument used for writing on wax
tablets.

SUBTLE, fine, delicate, thin; smooth, soft.

SUBTLETY (SUBTILITY), subtle device.

SUBURB, connected with loose living.

SUCCUBAE, demons in form of women.

SUCK, extract money from.

SUFFERANCE, suffering.

SUMMED, term of falconry: with full-grown plumage.

SUPER-NEGULUM, topers turned the cup bottom up when
it was empty.

SUPERSTITIOUS, over-scrupulous.

SUPPLE, to make pliant.

SURBATE, make sore with walking.

SURCEASE, cease.

SUR-REVERENCE, save your reverence.

SURVISE, peruse.

SUSCITABILITY, excitability.

SUSPECT, suspicion.

SUSPEND, suspect.

SUSPENDED, held over for the present.

SUTLER, victualler.

SWAD, clown, boor.

SWATH BANDS, swaddling clothes.

SWINGE, beat.

TABERD, emblazoned mantle or tunic worn by knights
and heralds.

TABLE(S), "pair of--," tablets, note-book.

TABOR, small drum.

TABRET, tabor.

TAFFETA, silk; "tuft-taffeta," a more costly silken fabric.

TAINT, "--a staff," break a lance at tilting in an
unscientific or dishonourable manner.

TAKE IN, capture, subdue.

TAKE ME WITH YOU, let me understand you.

TAKE UP, obtain on credit, borrow.

TALENT, sum or weight of Greek currency.

TALL, stout, brave.

TANKARD-BEARERS, men employed to fetch water from the
conduits.

TARLETON, celebrated comedian and jester.

TARTAROUS, like a Tartar.

TAVERN-TOKEN, "to swallow a--," get drunk.

TELL, count.

TELL-TROTH, truth-teller.

TEMPER, modify, soften.

TENDER, show regard, care for, cherish; manifest.

TENT, "take--," take heed.

TERSE, swept and polished.

TERTIA, "that portion of an army levied out of one
particular district or division of a country" (Gifford).

TESTON, tester, coin worth 6d.

THIRDBOROUGH, constable.

THREAD, quality.

THREAVES, droves.

THREE-FARTHINGS, piece of silver current under Elizabeth.

THREE-PILED, of finest quality, exaggerated.

THRIFTILY, carefully.

THRUMS, ends of the weaver's warp; coarse yarn made from.

THUMB-RING, familiar spirits were supposed capable of
being carried about in various ornaments or parts of dress.

TIBICINE, player on the tibia, or pipe.

TICK-TACK, game similar to backgammon.

TIGHTLY, promptly.

TIM, (?) expressive of a climax of nonentity.

TIMELESS, untimely, unseasonable.

TINCTURE, an essential or spiritual principle supposed
by alchemists to be transfusible into material things;
an imparted characteristic or tendency.

TINK, tinkle.

TIPPET, "turn--," change behaviour or way of life.

TIPSTAFF, staff tipped with metal.

TIRE, head-dress.

TIRE, feed ravenously, like a bird of prey.

TITILLATION, that which tickles the senses, as a perfume.

TOD, fox.

TOILED, worn out, harassed.

TOKEN, piece of base metal used in place of very small
coin, when this was scarce.

TONNELS, nostrils.

TOP, "parish--," large top kept in villages for
amusement and exercise in frosty weather when people
were out of work.

TOTER, tooter, player on a wind instrument.

TOUSE, pull, rend.

TOWARD, docile, apt; on the way to; as regards; present,
at hand.

TOY, whim; trick; term of contempt.

TRACT, attraction.

TRAIN, allure, entice.

TRANSITORY, transmittable.

TRANSLATE, transform.

TRAY-TRIP, game at dice (success depended on throwing
a three) (Nares).

TREACHOUR (TRECHER), traitor.

TREEN, wooden.

TRENCHER, serving-man who carved or served food.

TRENDLE-TAIL, trundle-tail, curly-tailed.

TRICK (TRICKING), term of heraldry: to draw outline of
coat of arms, etc., without blazoning.

TRIG, a spruce, dandified man.

TRILL, trickle.

TRILLIBUB, tripe, any worthless, trifling thing.

TRIPOLY, "come from--," able to perform feats of agility,
a "jest nominal," depending on the first part of the word
(Gifford).

TRITE, worn, shabby.

TRIVIA, three-faced goddess (Hecate).

TROJAN, familiar term for an equal or inferior; thief.

TROLL, sing loudly.

TROMP, trump, deceive.

TROPE, figure of speech.

TROW, think, believe, wonder.

TROWLE, troll.

TROWSES, breeches, drawers.

TRUCHMAN, interpreter.

TRUNDLE, JOHN, well-known printer.

TRUNDLE, roll, go rolling along.

TRUNDLING CHEATS, term among gipsies and beggars for
carts or coaches (Gifford).

TRUNK, speaking-tube.

TRUSS, tie the tagged laces that fastened the breeches
to the doublet.

TUBICINE, trumpeter.

TUCKET (Ital. toccato), introductory flourish on the
trumpet.

TUITION, guardianship.

TUMBLER, a particular kind of dog so called from the
mode of his hunting.

TUMBREL-SLOP, loose, baggy breeches.

TURD, excrement.

TUSK, gnash the teeth (Century Dict.).

TWIRE, peep, twinkle.

TWOPENNY ROOM, gallery.

TYRING-HOUSE, attiring-room.

ULENSPIEGEL.  See Howleglass.

UMBRATILE, like or pertaining to a shadow.

UMBRE, brown dye.

UNBATED, unabated.

UNBORED, (?) excessively bored.

UNCARNATE, not fleshly, or of flesh.

UNCOUTH, strange, unusual.

UNDERTAKER, "one who undertook by his influence in the
House of Commons to carry things agreeably to his
Majesty's wishes" (Whalley); one who becomes surety for.

UNEQUAL, unjust.

UNEXCEPTED, no objection taken at.

UNFEARED, unaffrighted.

UNHAPPILY, unfortunately.

UNICORN'S HORN, supposed antidote to poison.

UNKIND(LY), unnatural(ly).

UNMANNED, untamed (term in falconry).

UNQUIT, undischarged.

UNREADY, undressed.

UNRUDE, rude to an extreme.

UNSEASONED, unseasonable, unripe.

UNSEELED, a hawk's eyes were "seeled" by sewing the
eyelids together with fine thread.

UNTIMELY, unseasonably.

UNVALUABLE, invaluable.

UPBRAID, make a matter of reproach.

UPSEE, heavy kind of Dutch beer (Halliwell); "--Dutch,"
in the Dutch fashion.

UPTAILS ALL, refrain of a popular song.

URGE, allege as accomplice, instigator.

URSHIN, URCHIN, hedgehog.

USE, interest on money; part of sermon dealing with the
practical application of doctrine.

USE, be in the habit of, accustomed to; put out to interest.

USQUEBAUGH, whisky.

USURE, usury.

UTTER, put in circulation, make to pass current; put forth for sale.

VAIL, bow, do homage.

VAILS, tips, gratuities.

VALL.  See Vail.

VALLIES (Fr. valise), portmanteau, bag.

VAPOUR(S) (n. and v.), used affectedly, like "humour,"
in many senses, often very vaguely and freely ridiculed
by Jonson; humour, disposition, whims, brag(ging),
hector(ing), etc.

VARLET, bailiff, or serjeant-at-mace.

VAUT, vault.

VEER (naut.), pay out.

VEGETAL, vegetable; person full of life and vigour.

VELLUTE, velvet.

VELVET CUSTARD.  Cf. "Taming of the Shrew," iv. 3, 82,
"custard coffin," coffin being the raised crust over a pie.

VENT, vend, sell; give outlet to; scent, snuff up.

VENUE, bout (fencing term).

VERDUGO (Span.), hangman, executioner.

VERGE, "in the--," within a certain distance of the court.

VEX, agitate, torment.

VICE, the buffoon of old moralities; some kind of
machinery for moving a puppet (Gifford).

VIE AND REVIE, to hazard a certain sum, and to cover
it with a larger one.

VINCENT AGAINST YORK, two heralds-at-arms.

VINDICATE, avenge.

VIRGE, wand, rod.

VIRGINAL, old form of piano.

VIRTUE, valour.

VIVELY, in lifelike manner, livelily.

VIZARD, mask.

VOGUE, rumour, gossip.

VOICE, vote.

VOID, leave, quit.

VOLARY, cage, aviary.

VOLLEY, "at--," "o' the volee," at random (from a
term of tennis).

VORLOFFE, furlough.

WADLOE, keeper of the Devil Tavern, where Jonson and his
friends met in the 'Apollo' room (Whalley).

WAIGHTS, waits, night musicians, "band of musical
watchmen" (Webster), or old form of "hautboys."

WANNION, "vengeance," "plague" (Nares).

WARD, a famous pirate.

WARD, guard in fencing.

WATCHET, pale, sky blue.

WEAL, welfare.

WEED, garment.

WEFT, waif.

WEIGHTS, "to the gold--," to every minute particular.

WELKIN, sky.

WELL-SPOKEN, of fair speech.

WELL-TORNED, turned and polished, as on a wheel.

WELT, hem, border of fur.

WHER, whether.

WHETSTONE, GEORGE, an author who lived 1544(?) to 1587(?).

WHIFF, a smoke, or drink; "taking the--," inhaling the
tobacco smoke or some such accomplishment.

WHIGH-HIES, neighings, whinnyings.

WHIMSY, whim, "humour."

WHINILING, (?) whining, weakly.

WHIT, (?) a mere jot.

WHITEMEAT, food made of milk or eggs.

WICKED, bad, clumsy.

WICKER, pliant, agile.

WILDING, esp. fruit of wild apple or crab tree (Webster).

WINE, "I have the--for you," Prov.: I have the
perquisites (of the office) which you are to share
(Cunningham).

WINNY, "same as old word "wonne," to stay, etc." (Whalley).

WISE-WOMAN, fortune-teller.

WISH, recommend.

WISS (WUSSE), "I--," certainly, of a truth.

WITHOUT, beyond.

WITTY, cunning, ingenious, clever.

WOOD, collection, lot.

WOODCOCK, term of contempt.

WOOLSACK ("--pies"), name of tavern.

WORT, unfermented beer.

WOUNDY, great, extreme.

WREAK, revenge.

WROUGHT, wrought upon.

WUSSE, interjection.  (See Wiss).

YEANLING, lamb, kid.

ZANY, an inferior clown, who attended upon the chief
fool and mimicked his tricks.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sejanus: His Fall, by Ben Jonson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEJANUS: HIS FALL ***

***** This file should be named 5232-8.txt or 5232-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/3/5232/

Produced by Amy E Zelmer, Sue Asscher, and Robert Prince

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
